 Faint and far away the light burned, low on the horizon, shining through the sea mists.  It looks like a star, said Arya.  The star of home, said Denyo.  His father was shouting orders. Sailors scrambled up and down the three tall masts and moved  along the rigging, reefing the heavy purple sails. Below, oarsmen heaved and strained over two  great banks of oars. The decks tilted, creaking, as the galleas Titan's Daughter heeled to  starboard and began to come about.  The star of home. Arya stood at the prow, one hand resting on the gilded figurehead, a maiden  with a bowl of fruit. For half a heartbeat she let herself pretend that it was her home ahead.  But that was stupid. Her home was gone, her parents dead, and all her brothers slain but Jon  Snow on the Wall. That was where she had wanted to go. She told the captain as much, but even  the iron coin did not sway him. Arya never seemed to find the places she set out to reach. Yoren  had sworn to deliver her to Winterfell, only she had ended up in Harrenhal and Yoren in his  grave. When she escaped Harrenhal for Riverrun, Lem and Anguy and Tom o' Sevens took her  captive and dragged her to the hollow hill instead. Then the Hound had stolen her and dragged  her to the Twins. Arya had left him dying by the river and gone ahead to Saltpans, hoping to take  passage for Eastwatch-by-the-Sea, only...  Braavos might not be so bad. Syrio was from Braavos, and Jaqen might be there as well. It was  Jaqen who had given her the iron coin. He hadn't truly been her friend, the way that Syrio had,  but what good had friends ever done her? I don't need any friends, so long as I have Needle. She  brushed the ball of her thumb across the sword's smooth pommel, wishing, wishing...  If truth be told, Arya did not know what to wish for, any more than she knew what awaited her  beneath that distant light. The captain had given her passage but he had no time to speak with  her. Some of the crew shunned her, but others gave her gifts.a silver fork, fingerless gloves, a  floppy woolen hat patched with leather. One man showed her how to tie sailor's knots. Another  poured her thimble cups of fire wine. The friendly ones would tap their chests, repeating their  names over and over until Arya said them back, though none ever thought to ask her name. They  called her Salty, since she'd come aboard at Saltpans, near the mouth of the Trident. It was as  good a name as any, she supposed.  The last of the night's stars had vanished... all but the pair dead ahead. It's two stars now.  Two eyes, said Denyo. The Titan sees us.  The Titan of Braavos. Old Nan had told them stories of the Titan back in Winterfell. He was a  giant as tall as a mountain, and whenever Braavos stood in danger he would wake with fire in his  eyes, his rocky limbs grinding and groaning as he waded out into the sea to smash the enemies.  The Braavosi feed him on the juicy pink flesh of little highborn girls, Nan would end, and  Sansa would give a stupid squeak. But Maester Luwin said the Titan was only a statue, and Old  Nan's stories were only stories.   Winterfell is burned and fallen, Arya reminded herself. Old Nan and Maester Luwin were both  dead, most like, and Sansa too. It did no good to think of them. All men must die. That was what  the words meant, the words that Jaqen H'ghar had taught her when he gave her the worn iron  coin. She had learned more Braavosi words since they left Saltpans, the words for please and  thank you and sea and star and fire wine, but she came to them knowing that all men must die.  Most of the Daughter's crew had a smattering of the Common Tongue from nights ashore in  Oldtown and King's Landing and Maidenpool, though only the captain and his sons spoke it well  enough to talk to her. Denyo was the youngest of those sons, a plump, cheerful boy of twelve  who kept his father's cabin and helped his eldest brother do his sums.  I hope your Titan isn't hungry, Arya told him.  Hungry? Denyo said, confused.  It takes no matter. Even if the Titan did eat juicy pink girl flesh, Arya would not fear him.  She was a scrawny thing, no proper meal for a giant, and almost eleven, practically a woman  grown. And Salty isn't highborn, either. Is the Titan the god of Braavos? she asked. Or do  you have the Seven?  All gods are honored in Braavos. The captain's son loved to talk about his city almost as  much as he loved to talk about his father's ship. Your Seven have a sept here, the Sept-Beyond-  the-Sea, but only Westerosi sailors worship there.  They are not my Seven. They were my mother's gods, and they let the Freys murder her at the  Twins. She wondered whether she would find a godswood in Braavos, with a weirwood at its  heart. Denyo might know, but she could not ask him. Salty was from Saltpans, and what would a  girl from Saltpans know about the old gods of the north? The old gods are dead, she told herself,  with Mother and Father and Robb and Bran and Rickon, all dead. A long time ago, she  remembered her father saying that when the cold winds blow the lone wolf dies and the pack  survives. He had it all backwards. Arya, the lone wolf, still lived, but the wolves of the pack had  been taken and slain and skinned.  The Moonsingers led us to this place of refuge, where the dragons of Valyria could not find  us, Denyo said. Theirs is the greatest temple. We esteem the Father of Waters as well, but his  house is built anew whenever he takes his bride. The rest of the gods dwell together on an isle in  the center of the city. That is where you will find the... the Many-Faced God.  The Titan's eyes seemed brighter now, and farther apart. Arya did not know any Many-Faced  God, but if he answered prayers, he might be the god she sought. Ser Gregor, she thought,  Dunsen, Raff the Sweetling, Ser Ilyn, Ser Meryn, Queen Cersei. Only six now. Joffrey was dead,  the Hound had slain Polliver, and she'd stabbed the Tickler herself, and that stupid squire with  the pimple. I wouldn't have killed him if he hadn't grabbed me. The Hound had been dying  when she left him on the banks of the Trident, burning up with fever from his wound. I should  have given him the gift of mercy and put a knife into his heart.  Salty, look! Denyo took her by the arm and turned her. Can you see? There. He pointed.  The mists gave way before them, ragged grey curtains parted by their prow. The Titan's  Daughter cleaved through the grey-green waters on billowing purple wings. Arya could hear the   cries of seabirds overhead. There, where Denyo pointed, a line of stony ridges rose sudden from  the sea, their steep slopes covered with soldier pines and black spruce. But dead ahead the sea  had broken through, and there above the open water the Titan towered, with his eyes blazing and  his long green hair blowing in the wind.  His legs bestrode the gap, one foot planted on each mountain, his shoulders looming tall above  the jagged crests. His legs were carved of solid stone, the same black granite as the sea monts on  which he stood, though around his hips he wore an armored skirt of greenish bronze. His  breastplate was bronze as well, and his head in his crested halfhelm. His blowing hair was made  of hempen ropes dyed green, and huge fires burned in the caves that were his eyes. One hand  rested atop the ridge to his left, bronze fingers coiled about a knob of stone; the other thrust up  into the air, clasping the hilt of a broken sword.  He is only a little bigger than King Baelor's statue in King's Landing, she told herself when  they were still well off to sea. As the galleas drove closer to where the breakers smashed against  the ridgeline, however, the Titan grew larger still. She could hear Denyo's father bellowing  commands in his deep voice, and up in the rigging men were bringing in the sails. We are going  to row beneath the Titan's legs. Arya could see the arrow slits in the great bronze breastplate,  and stains and speckles on the Titan's arms and shoulders where the seabirds nested. Her neck  craned upward. Baelor the Blessed would not reach his knee. He could step right over the walls  of Winterfell.  Then the Titan gave a mighty roar.  The sound was as huge as he was, a terrible groaning and grinding, so loud it drowned out even  the captain's voice and the crash of the waves against those pine-clad ridges. A thousand  seabirds took to the air at once, and Arya flinched until she saw that Denyo was laughing. He  warns the Arsenal of our coming, that is all, he shouted. You must not be afraid.  I never was, Arya shouted back. It was loud, is all.  Wind and wave had the Titan's Daughter hard in hand now, driving her swiftly toward the  channel. Her double bank of oars stroked smoothly, lashing the sea to white foam as the Titan's  shadow fell upon them. For a moment it seemed as though they must surely smash up against the  stones beneath his legs. Huddled by Denyo at the prow, Arya could taste salt where the spray had  touched her face. She had to look straight up to see the Titan's head. The Braavosi feed him on  the juicy pink flesh of little highborn girls, she heard Old Nan say again, but she was not a little  girl, and she would not be frightened of a stupid statue.  Even so, she kept one hand on Needle as they slipped between his legs. More arrow slits dotted  the insides of those great stone thighs, and when Arya craned her neck around to watch the  crow's nest slip through with a good ten yards to spare, she spied murder holes beneath the  Titan's armored skirts, and pale faces staring down at them from behind the iron bars.  And then they were past.  The shadow lifted, the pine-clad ridges fell away to either side, the winds dwindled, and they  found themselves moving through a great lagoon. Ahead rose another sea mont, a knob of rock  that pushed up from the water like a spiked fist, its stony battlements bristling with scorpions,   spitfires, and trebuchets. The Arsenal of Braavos, Denyo named it, as proud as if he'd built it.  They can build a war galley there in a day. Arya could see dozens of galleys tied up at quays  and perched on launching slips. The painted prows of others poked from innumerable wooden  sheds along the stony shores, like hounds in a kennel, lean and mean and hungry, waiting for a  hunter's horn to call them forth. She tried to count them, but there were too many, and more  docks and sheds and quays where the shoreline curved away.  Two galleys had come out to meet them. They seemed to skim upon the water like dragonflies,  their pale oars flashing. Arya heard the captain shouting to them and their own captains shouting  back, but she did not understand the words. A great horn sounded. The galleys passed to either  side of them, so close that she could hear the muffled sound of drums from within their purple  hulls, bom bom bom bom bom bom bom bom, like the beat of living hearts.  Then the galleys were behind them, and the Arsenal as well. Ahead stretched a broad expanse  of pea-green water rippled like a sheet of colored glass. From its wet heart arose the city proper,  a great sprawl of domes and towers and bridges, grey and gold and red. The hundred isles of  Braavos in the sea.  Maester Luwin had taught them about Braavos, but Arya had forgotten much of what he'd said.  It was a flat city, she could see that even from afar, not like King's Landing on its three high  hills. The only hills here were the ones that men had raised of brick and granite, bronze and  marble. Something else was missing as well, though it took her a few moments to realize what it  was. The city has no walls. But when she said as much to Denyo, he laughed at her. Our walls  are made of wood and painted purple, he told her. Our galleys are our walls. We need no  other.  The deck creaked behind them. Arya turned to find Denyo's father looming over them in his  long captain's coat of purple wool. Tradesman-Captain Ternesio Terys wore no whiskers and  kept his grey hair cut short and neat, framing his square, windburnt face. On the crossing she had  oft seen him jesting with his crew, but when he frowned men ran from him as if before a storm.  He was frowning now. Our voyage is at an end, he told Arya. We make for the Chequy Port,  where the Sealord's customs officers will come aboard to inspect our holds. They will be half a  day at it, they always are, but there is no need for you to wait upon their pleasure. Gather your  belongings. I shall lower a boat, and Yorko will put you ashore.  Ashore. Arya bit her lip. She had crossed the narrow sea to get here, but if the captain had asked  she would have told him she wanted to stay aboard the Titan's Daughter. Salty was too small to  man an oar, she knew that now, but she could learn to splice ropes and reef the sails and steer a  course across the great salt seas. Denyo had taken her up to the crow's nest once, and she hadn't  been afraid at all, though the deck had seemed a tiny thing below her. I can do sums too, and  keep a cabin neat.  But the galleas had no need of a second boy. Besides, she had only to look at the captain's face  to know how anxious he was to be rid of her. So Arya only nodded. Ashore, she said, though  ashore meant only strangers.   Valar dohaeris. He touched two fingers to his brow. I beg you remember Ternesio Terys and  the service he has done you.  I will, Arya said in a small voice. The wind tugged at her cloak, insistent as a ghost. It was  time she was away.  Gather your belongings, the captain had said, but there were few enough of those. Only the  clothes she was wearing, her little pouch of coins, the gifts the crew had given her, the dagger on  her left hip and Needle on her right.  The boat was ready before she was, and Yorko was at the oars. He was the captain's son as  well, but older than Denyo and less friendly. I never said farewell to Denyo, she thought as she  clambered down to join him. She wondered if she would ever see the boy again. I should have  said farewell.  The Titan's Daughter dwindled in their wake, while the city grew larger with every stroke of  Yorko's oars. A harbor was visible off to her right, a tangle of piers and quays crowded with big-  bellied whalers out of Ibben, swan ships from the Summer Isles, and more galleys than a girl  could count. Another harbor, more distant, was off to her left, beyond a sinking point of land  where the tops of half-drowned buildings thrust themselves above the water. Arya had never  seen so many big buildings all together in one place. King's Landing had the Red Keep and the  Great Sept of Baelor and the Dragonpit, but Braavos seemed to boast a score of temples and  towers and palaces that were as large or even larger. I will be a mouse again, she thought glumly,  the way I was in Harrenhal before I ran away.  The city had seemed like one big island from where the Titan stood, but as Yorko rowed them  closer she saw that it was many small islands close together, linked by arched stone bridges that  spanned innumerable canals. Beyond the harbor she glimpsed streets of grey stone houses, built  so close they leaned one upon the other. To Arya's eyes they were queer-looking, four and five  stories tall and very skinny, with sharp-peaked tile roofs like pointed hats. She saw no thatch,  and only a few timbered houses of the sort she knew in Westeros. They have no trees, she  realized. Braavos is all stone, a grey city in a green sea.  Yorko swung them north of the docks and down the gullet of a great canal, a broad green  waterway that ran straight into the heart of the city. They passed under the arches of a carved  stone bridge, decorated with half a hundred kinds of fish and crabs and squids. A second bridge  appeared ahead, this one carved in lacy leafy vines, and beyond that a third, gazing down on  them from a thousand painted eyes. The mouths of lesser canals opened to either side, and others  still smaller off of those. Some of the houses were built above the waterways, she saw, turning  the canals into a sort of tunnel. Slender boats slid in and out among them, wrought in the shapes  of water serpents with painted heads and upraised tails. Those were not rowed but poled, she  saw, by men who stood at their sterns in cloaks of grey and brown and deep moss green. She saw  huge flat-bottomed barges too, heaped high with crates and barrels and pushed along by twenty  polemen to a side, and fancy floating houses with lanterns of colored glass, velvet drapes, and  brazen figureheads. Off in the far distance, looming above canals and houses both, was a massive  grey stone roadway of some kind, supported by three tiers of mighty arches marching away south   into the haze. What's that? Arya asked Yorko, pointing. The sweetwater river, he told her.  It brings fresh water from the mainland, across the mudflats and the briny shallows. Good sweet  water for the fountains.  When she looked behind her, the harbor and lagoon were lost to sight. Ahead, a row of mighty  statues stood along both sides of the channel, solemn stone men in long bronze robes, spattered  with the droppings of the seabirds. Some held books, some daggers, some hammers. One  clutched a golden star in his upraised hand. Another was upending a stone flagon to send an  endless stream of water splashing down into the canal. Are they gods? asked Arya.  Sealords, said Yorko. The Isle of the Gods is farther on. See? Six bridges down, on the right  bank. That is the Temple of the Moonsingers.  It was one of those that Arya had spied from the lagoon, a mighty mass of snow-white marble  topped by a huge silvered dome whose milk glass windows showed all the phases of the moon. A  pair of marble maidens flanked its gates, tall as the Sealords, supporting a crescent-shaped lintel.  Beyond it stood another temple, a red stone edifice as stern as any fortress. Atop its great square  tower a fire blazed in an iron brazier twenty feet across, whilst smaller fires flanked its brazen  doors. The red priests love their fires, Yorko told her. The Lord of Light is their god, red  R'hllor.  I know. Arya remembered Thoros of Myr in his bits of old armor, worn over robes so faded that  he had seemed more a pink priest than a red one. Yet his kiss had brought Lord Beric back from  death. She watched the red god's house drift by, wondering whether these Braavosi priests of his  could do the same.  Next came a huge brick structure festooned with lichen. Arya might have taken it for a  storehouse had not Yorko said, That is the Holy Refuge, where we honor the small gods the  world has forgotten. You will hear it called the Warren too. A small canal ran between the  Warren's looming lichen-covered walls, and there he swung them right. They passed through a  tunnel and out again into the light. More shrines loomed up to either side.  I never knew there were so many gods, Arya said.  Yorko grunted. They went around a bend and beneath another bridge. On their left appeared a  rocky knoll with a windowless temple of dark grey stone at its top. A flight of stone steps led  from its doors down to a covered dock.  Yorko backed the oars, and the boat bumped gently against stone pilings. He grasped an iron  ring set to hold them for a moment. Here I leave you.  The dock was shadowed, the steps steep. The temple's black tile roof came to a sharp peak, like  the houses along the canals. Arya chewed her lip. Syrio came from Braavos. He might have  visited this temple. He might have climbed those steps. She grabbed a ring and pulled herself up  onto the dock.  You know my name, said Yorko from the boat.  Yorko Terys.  Valar dohaeris. He pushed off with his oar and drifted back off into the deeper water. Arya  watched him row back the way they'd come, until he vanished in the shadows of the bridge. As   the swish of oars faded, she could almost hear the beating of her heart. Suddenly she was  somewhere else... back in Harrenhal with Gendry, maybe, or with the Hound in the woods along  the Trident. Salty is a stupid child, she told herself. I am a wolf, and will not be afraid. She patted  Needle's hilt for luck and plunged into the shadows, taking the steps two at a time so no one  could ever say she'd been afraid.  At the top she found a set of carved wooden doors twelve feet high. The left-hand door was  made of weirwood pale as bone, the right of gleaming ebony. In their center was a carved moon  face; ebony on the weirwood side, weirwood on the ebony. The look of it reminded her somehow  of the heart tree in the godswood at Winterfell. The doors are watching me, she thought. She  pushed upon both doors at once with the flat of her gloved hands, but neither one would budge.  Locked and barred. Let me in, you stupid, she said. I crossed the narrow sea. She made a fist  and pounded. Jaqen told me to come. I have the iron coin. She pulled it from her pouch and  held it up. See? Valar morghulis.  The doors made no reply, except to open.  They opened inward all in silence, with no human hand to move them. Arya took a step  forward, and another. The doors closed behind her, and for a moment she was blind. Needle was  in her hand, though she did not remember drawing it.  A few candles burned along the walls, but gave so little light that Arya could not see her own  feet. Someone was whispering, too softly for her to make out words. Someone else was weeping.  She heard light footfalls, leather sliding over stone, a door opening and closing. Water, I hear  water too.  Slowly her eyes adjusted. The temple seemed much larger within than it had without. The septs  of Westeros were seven-sided, with seven altars for the seven gods, but here there were more  gods than seven. Statues of them stood along the walls, massive and threatening. Around their  feet red candles flickered, as dim as distant stars. The nearest was a marble woman twelve feet  tall. Real tears were trickling from her eyes, to fill the bowl she cradled in her arms. Beyond her  was a man with a lion's head seated on a throne, carved of ebony. On the other side of the doors,  a huge horse of bronze and iron reared up on two great legs. Farther on she could make out a  great stone face, a pale infant with a sword, a shaggy black goat the size of an aurochs, a hooded  man leaning on a staff. The rest were only looming shapes to her, half-seen through the gloom.  Between the gods were hidden alcoves thick with shadows, with here and there a candle burning.  Silent as a shadow, Arya moved between rows of long stone benches, her sword in hand. The  floor was made of stone, her feet told her; not polished marble like the floor of the Great Sept of  Baelor, but something rougher. She passed some women whispering together. The air was warm  and heavy, so heavy that she yawned. She could smell the candles. The scent was unfamiliar, and  she put it down to some queer incense, but as she got deeper into the temple, they seemed to  smell of snow and pine needles and hot stew. Good smells, Arya told herself, and felt a little  braver. Brave enough to slip Needle back into its sheath.  In the center of the temple she found the water she had heard; a pool ten feet across, black as  ink and lit by dim red candles. Beside it sat a young man in a silvery cloak, weeping softly. She   watched him dip a hand in the water, sending scarlet ripples racing across the pool. When he  drew his fingers back he sucked them, one by one. He must be thirsty. There were stone cups  along the rim of the pool. Arya filled one and brought it to him, so he could drink. The young  man stared at her for a long moment when she offered it to him. Valar morghulis, he said.  Valar dohaeris, she replied.  He drank deep, and dropped the cup into the pool with a soft plop. Then he pushed himself to  his feet, swaying, holding his belly. For a moment Arya thought he was going to fall. It was only  then that she saw the dark stain below his belt, spreading as she watched. You're stabbed, she  blurted, but the man paid her no mind. He lurched unsteadily toward the wall and crawled into an  alcove onto a hard stone bed. When Arya peered around, she saw other alcoves too. On some  there were old people sleeping.  No, a half-remembered voice seemed to whisper in her head. They are dead, or dying. Look  with your eyes.  A hand touched her arm.  Arya spun away, but it was only a little girl: a pale little girl in a cowled robe that seemed to  engulf her, black on the right side and white on the left. Beneath the cowl was a gaunt and bony  face, hollow cheeks, and dark eyes that looked as big as saucers. Don't grab me, Arya warned  the waif. I killed the boy who grabbed me last.  The girl said some words that Arya did not know.  She shook her head. Don't you know the Common Tongue?  A voice behind her said, I do.  Arya did not like the way they kept surprising her. The hooded man was tall, enveloped in a  larger version of the black-and-white robe the girl was wearing. Beneath his cowl all she could  see was the faint red glitter of candlelight reflecting off his eyes. What place is this? she asked  him.  A place of peace. His voice was gentle. You are safe here. This is the House of Black and  White, my child. Though you are young to seek the favor of the Many-Faced God.  Is he like the southron god, the one with seven faces?  Seven? No. He has faces beyond count, little one, as many faces as there are stars in the sky.  In Braavos, men worship as they will... but at the end of every road stands Him of Many Faces,  waiting. He will be there for you one day, do not fear. You need not rush to his embrace.  I only came to find Jaqen H'ghar.  I do not know this name.  Her heart sank. He was from Lorath. His hair was white on one side and red on the other. He  said he'd teach me secrets, and gave me this. The iron coin was clutched in her fist. When she  opened her fingers, it clung to her sweaty palm.  The priest studied the coin, though he made no move to touch it. The waif with the big eyes was  looking at it too. Finally, the cowled man said, Tell me your name, child.  Salty. I come from Saltpans, by the Trident.   Though she could not see his face, somehow she could feel him smiling. No, he said. Tell  me your name.  Squab, she answered this time.  Your true name, child.  My mother named me Nan, but they call me Weasel.  Your name.  She swallowed. Arry. I'm Arry.  Closer. And now the truth?  Fear cuts deeper than swords, she told herself. Arya. She whispered the word the first time.  The second time she threw it at him. I am Arya, of House Stark.  You are, he said, but the House of Black and White is no place for Arya, of House Stark.  Please, she said. I have no place to go.  Do you fear death?  She bit her lip. No.  Let us see. The priest lowered his cowl. Beneath he had no face; only a yellowed skull with a  few scraps of skin still clinging to the cheeks, and a white worm wriggling from one empty eye  socket. Kiss me, child, he croaked, in a voice as dry and husky as a death rattle.  Does he think to scare me? Arya kissed him where his nose should be and plucked the grave  worm from his eye to eat it, but it melted like a shadow in her hand.  The yellow skull was melting too, and the kindliest old man that she had ever seen was smiling  down at her. No one has ever tried to eat my worm before, he said. Are you hungry, child?  Yes, she thought, but not for food.   Each night before sleep, she murmured her prayer into her pillow. Ser Gregor, it went.  Dunsen, Raff the Sweetling, Ser Ilyn, Ser Meryn, Queen Cersei. She would have whispered  the names of the Freys of the Crossing too, if she had known them. One day I'll know, she told  herself, and then I'll kill them all.  No whisper was too faint to be heard in the House of Black and White. Child, said the kindly  man one day, what are those names you whisper of a night?  I don't whisper any names, she said.  You lie, he said. All men lie when they are afraid. Some tell many lies, some but a few.  Some have only one great lie they tell so often that they almost come to believe it... though some  small part of them will always know that it is still a lie, and that will show upon their faces. Tell  me of these names.  She chewed her lip. The names don't matter.  They do, the kindly man insisted. Tell me, child.  Tell me, or we will turn you out, she heard. They're people I hate. I want them to die.  We hear many such prayers in this House.  I know, said Arya. Jaqen H'ghar had granted three of her prayers once. All I had to do was  whisper...  Is that why you have come to us? the kindly man went on. To learn our arts, so you may kill  these men you hate?  Arya did not know how to answer that. Maybe.  Then you have come to the wrong place. It is not for you to say who shall live and who shall  die. That gift belongs to Him of Many Faces. We are but his servants, sworn to do his will.  Oh. Arya glanced at the statues that stood along the walls, candles glimmering round their  feet. Which god is he?  Why, all of them, said the priest in black and white.  He never told her his name. Neither did the waif, the little girl with the big eyes and hollow face  who reminded her of another little girl, named Weasel. Like Arya, the waif lived below the  temple, along with three acolytes, two serving men, and a cook called Umma. Umma liked to  talk as she worked, but Arya could not understand a word she said. The others had no names, or  did not choose to share them. One serving man was very old, his back bent like a bow. The  second was red-faced, with hair growing from his ears. She took them both for mutes until she  heard them praying. The acolytes were younger. The eldest was her father's age; the other two  could not have been much older than Sansa, who had been her sister. The acolytes wore black  and white too, but their robes had no cowls, and were black on the left side and white on the  right. With the kindly man and the waif, it was the opposite. Arya was given servant's garb: a  tunic of undyed wool, baggy breeches, linen smallclothes, cloth slippers for her feet.  Only the kindly man knew the Common Tongue. Who are you? he would ask her every day.   No one, she would answer, she who had been Arya of House Stark, Arya Underfoot, Arya  Horseface. She had been Arry and Weasel too, and Squab and Salty, Nan the cupbearer, a grey  mouse, a sheep, the ghost of Harrenhal... but not for true, not in her heart of hearts. In there she  was Arya of Winterfell, the daughter of Lord Eddard Stark and Lady Catelyn, who had once had  brothers named Robb and Bran and Rickon, a sister named Sansa, a direwolf called Nymeria, a  half brother named Jon Snow. In there she was someone... but that was not the answer that he  wanted.  Without a common language, Arya had no way of talking to the others. She listened to them,  though, and repeated the words she heard to herself as she went about her work. Though the  youngest acolyte was blind, he had charge of the candles. He would walk the temple in soft  slippers, surrounded by the murmurings of the old women who came each day to pray. Even  without eyes, he always knew which candles had gone out. He has the scent to guide him, the  kindly man explained, and the air is warmer where a candle burns. He told Arya to close her  eyes and try it for herself.  They prayed at dawn before they broke their fast, kneeling around the still, black pool. Some  days the kindly man led the prayer. Other days it was the waif. Arya only knew a few words of  Braavosi, the ones that were the same in High Valyrian. So she prayed her own prayer to the  Many-Faced God, the one that went, Ser Gregor, Dunsen, Raff the Sweetling, Ser Ilyn, Ser  Meryn, Queen Cersei. She prayed in silence. If the Many-Faced God was a proper god, he  would hear her.  Worshipers came to the House of Black and White every day. Most came alone and sat alone;  they lit candles at one altar or another, prayed beside the pool, and sometimes wept. A few drank  from the black cup and went to sleep; more did not drink. There were no services, no songs, no  paeans of praise to please the god. The temple was never full. From time to time, a worshiper  would ask to see a priest, and the kindly man or the waif would take him down into the sanctum,  but that did not happen often.  Thirty different gods stood along the walls, surrounded by their little lights. The Weeping  Woman was the favorite of old women, Arya saw; rich men preferred the Lion of Night, poor  men the Hooded Wayfarer. Soldiers lit candles to Bakkalon, the Pale Child, sailors to the Moon-  Pale Maiden and the Merling King. The Stranger had his shrine as well, though hardly anyone  ever came to him. Most of the time only a single candle stood flickering at his feet. The kindly  man said it did not matter. He has many faces, and many ears to hear.  The knoll on which the temple stood was honeycombed with passageways hewn from the rock.  The priests and acolytes had their sleeping cells on the first level, Arya and the servants on the  second. The lowest level was forbidden to all save the priests. That was where the holy sanctum  lay.  When she was not working, Arya was free to wander as she would amongst the vaults and  storerooms, so long as she did not leave the temple, nor descend to the third cellar. She found a  room full of weapons and armor: ornate helms and curious old breastplates, longswords, daggers,  and dirks, crossbows and tall spears with leaf-shaped heads. Another vault was crammed with   clothing, thick furs and splendid silks in half a hundred colors, next to piles of foul-smelling rags  and threadbare roughspuns. There must be treasure chambers too, Arya decided. She pictured  stacks of golden plates, bags of silver coins, sapphires blue as the sea, ropes of fat green pearls.  One day the kindly man came on her unexpectedly and asked what she was doing. She told him  that she had gotten lost.  You lie. Worse, you lie poorly. Who are you?  No one.  Another lie. He sighed.  Weese would have beaten her bloody if he had caught her in a lie, but it was different in the  House of Black and White. When she was helping in the kitchen, Umma would sometimes  smack her with her spoon if she got in the way, but no one else ever raised a hand to her. They  only raise their hands to kill, she thought.  She got along well enough with the cook. Umma would slap a knife into her hand and point at  an onion, and Arya would chop it. Umma would shove her toward a mound of dough, and Arya  would knead it until the cook said stop (stop was the first Braavosi word she learned). Umma  would hand her a fish, and Arya would bone it and fillet it and roll it in the nuts the cook was  crushing. The brackish waters that surrounded Braavos teemed with fish and shellfish of every  sort, the kindly man explained. A slow brown river entered the lagoon from the south, wandering  through a wide expanse of reeds, tidal pools, and mudflats. Clams and cockles abounded  hereabouts; mussels and muskfish, frogs and turtles, mud crabs and leopard crabs and climber  crabs, red eels, black eels, striped eels, lampreys, and oysters; all made frequent appearances on  the carved wooden table where the servants of the Many-Faced God took their meals. Some  nights Umma spiced the fish with sea salt and cracked peppercorns, or cooked the eels with  chopped garlic. Once in a great while the cook would even use some saffron. Hot Pie would have  liked it here, Arya thought.  Supper was her favorite time. It had been a long while since Arya had gone to sleep every night  with a full belly. Some nights the kindly man would allow her to ask him questions. Once she  asked him why the people who came to the temple always seemed so peaceful; back home,  people were scared to die. She remembered how that pimply squire had wept when she stabbed  him in the belly, and the way Ser Amory Lorch had begged when the Goat had him thrown in the  bear pit. She remembered the village by the God's Eye, and the way the villagers shrieked and  screamed and whimpered whenever the Tickler started asking after gold.  Death is not the worst thing, the kindly man replied. It is His gift to us, an end to want and  pain. On the day that we are born the Many-Faced God sends each of us a dark angel to walk  through life beside us. When our sins and our sufferings grow too great to be borne, the angel  takes us by the hand to lead us to the nightlands, where the stars burn ever bright. Those who  come to drink from the black cup are looking for their angels. If they are afraid, the candles  soothe them. When you smell our candles burning, what does it make you think of, my child?  Winterfell, she might have said. I smell snow and smoke and pine needles. I smell the stables. I  smell Hodor laughing, and Jon and Robb battling in the yard, and Sansa singing about some   stupid lady fair. I smell the crypts where the stone kings sit, I smell hot bread baking, I smell the  godswood. I smell my wolf, I smell her fur, almost as if she were still beside me. I don't smell  anything, she said, to see what he would say.  You lie, he said, but you may keep your secrets if you wish, Arya of House Stark. He only  called her that when she displeased him. You know that you may leave this place. You are not  one of us, not yet. You may go home anytime you wish.  You told me that if I left, I couldn't come back.  Just so.  Those words made her sad. Syrio used to say that too, Arya remembered. He said it all the time.  Syrio Forel had taught her needlework and died for her. I don't want to leave.  Then stay... but remember, the House of Black and White is not a home for orphans. All men  must serve beneath this roof. Valar dohaeris is how we say it here. Remain if you will, but know  that we shall require your obedience. At all times and in all things. If you cannot obey, you must  depart.  I can obey.  We shall see.  She had other tasks besides helping Umma. She swept the temple floors; she served and poured  at meals; she sorted piles of dead men's clothing, emptied their purses, and counted out stacks of  queer coins. Every morning she walked beside the kindly man as he made his circuit of the  temple to find the dead. Silent as a shadow, she would tell herself, remembering Syrio. She  carried a lantern with thick iron shutters. At each alcove, she would open the shutter a crack, to  look for corpses.  The dead were never hard to find. They came to the House of Black and White, prayed for an  hour or a day or a year, drank sweet dark water from the pool, and stretched out on a stone bed  behind one god or another. They closed their eyes, and slept, and never woke. The gift of the  Many-Faced God takes myriad forms, the kindly man told her, but here it is always gentle.  When they found a body he would say a prayer and make certain life had fled, and Arya would  fetch the serving men, whose task it was to carry the dead down to the vaults. There acolytes  would strip and wash the bodies. The dead men's clothes and coins and valuables went into a bin  for sorting. Their cold flesh would be taken to the lower sanctum where only the priests could  go; what happened in there Arya was not allowed to know. Once, as she was eating her supper, a  terrible suspicion seized hold of her, and she put down her knife and stared suspiciously at a slice  of pale white meat. The kindly man saw the horror on her face. It is pork, child, he told her,  only pork.  Her bed was stone, and reminded her of Harrenhal and the bed she'd slept in when scrubbing  steps for Weese. The mattress was stuffed with rags instead of straw, which made it lumpier than  the one she'd had at Harrenhal, but less scratchy too. She was allowed as many blankets as she  wished; thick woolen blankets, red and green and plaid. And her cell was hers alone. She kept  her treasures there: the silver fork and floppy hat and fingerless gloves given her by the sailors   on the Titan's Daughter, her dagger, boots, and belt, her small store of coins, the clothes she had  been wearing...  And Needle.  Though her duties left her little time for needlework, she practiced when she could, dueling  with her shadow by the light of a blue candle. One night the waif happened to be passing and  saw Arya at her swordplay. The girl did not say a word, but the next day, the kindly man walked  Arya back to her cell. You need to rid yourself of all this, he said of her treasures.  Arya felt stricken. They're mine.  And who are you?  No one.  He picked up her silver fork. This belongs to Arya of House Stark. All these things belong to  her. There is no place for them here. There is no place for her. Hers is too proud a name, and we  have no room for pride. We are servants here.  I serve, she said, wounded. She liked the silver fork.  You play at being a servant, but in your heart you are a lord's daughter. You have taken other  names, but you wore them as lightly as you might wear a gown. Under them was always Arya.  I don't wear gowns. You can't fight in a stupid gown.  Why would you wish to fight? Are you some bravo, strutting through the alleys, spoiling for  blood? He sighed. Before you drink from the cold cup, you must offer up all you are to Him of  Many Faces. Your body. Your soul. Yourself. If you cannot bring yourself to do that, you must  leave this place.  The iron coin.  .has paid your passage here. From this point you must pay your own way, and the cost is  dear.  I don't have any gold.  What we offer cannot be bought with gold. The cost is all of you. Men take many paths  through this vale of tears and pain. Ours is the hardest. Few are made to walk it. It takes  uncommon strength of body and spirit, and a heart both hard and strong.  I have a hole where my heart should be, she thought, and nowhere else to go. I'm strong. As  strong as you. I'm hard.  You believe this is the only place for you. It was as if he'd heard her thoughts. You are  wrong in that. You would find softer service in the household of some merchant. Or would you  sooner be a courtesan, and have songs sung of your beauty? Speak the word, and we will send  you to the Black Pearl or the Daughter of the Dusk. You will sleep on rose petals and wear silken  skirts that rustle when you walk, and great lords will beggar themselves for your maiden's blood.  Or if it is marriage and children you desire, tell me, and we shall find a husband for you. Some  honest apprentice boy, a rich old man, a seafarer, whatever you desire.  She wanted none of that. Wordless, she shook her head.  Is it Westeros you dream of, child? Luco Prestayn's Lady Bright leaves upon the morrow, for  Gulltown, Duskendale, King's Landing, and Tyrosh. Shall we find you passage on her?   I only just came from Westeros. Sometimes it seemed a thousand years since she had fled  King's Landing, and sometimes it seemed like only yesterday, but she knew she could not go  back. I'll go if you don't want me, but I won't go there.  My wants do not matter, said the kindly man. It may be that the Many-Faced God has led  you here to be His instrument, but when I look at you I see a child... and worse, a girl child.  Many have served Him of Many Faces through the centuries, but only a few of His servants have  been women. Women bring life into the world. We bring the gift of death. No one can do both.  He is trying to scare me away, Arya thought, the way he did with the worm. I don't care about  that.  You should. Stay, and the Many-Faced God will take your ears, your nose, your tongue. He  will take your sad grey eyes that have seen so much. He will take your hands, your feet, your  arms and legs, your private parts. He will take your hopes and dreams, your loves and hates.  Those who enter His service must give up all that makes them who they are. Can you do that?  He cupped her chin and gazed deep into her eyes, so deep it made her shiver. No, he said, I do  not think you can.  Arya knocked his hand away. I could if I wanted to.  So says Arya of House Stark, eater of grave worms.  I can give up anything I want!  He gestured at her treasures. Then start with these.  That night after supper, Arya went back to her cell and took off her robe and whispered her  names, but sleep refused to take her. She tossed on her mattress stuffed with rags, gnawing on  her lip. She could feel the hole inside her where her heart had been.  In the black of night she rose again, donned the clothes she'd worn from Westeros, and buckled  on her swordbelt. Needle hung from one hip, her dagger from the other. With her floppy hat on  her head, her fingerless gloves tucked into her belt, and her silver fork in one hand, she went  stealing up the steps. There is no place here for Arya of House Stark, she was thinking. Arya's  place was Winterfell, only Winterfell was gone. When the snows fall and the white winds blow,  the lone wolf dies, but the pack survives. She had no pack, though. They had killed her pack, Ser  Ilyn and Ser Meryn and the queen, and when she tried to make a new one all of them ran off, Hot  Pie and Gendry and Yoren and Lommy Greenhands, even Harwin, who had been her father's  man. She shoved through the doors, out into the night.  It was the first time she had been outside since entering the temple. The sky was overcast, and  fog covered the ground like a frayed grey blanket. Off to her right she heard paddling from the  canal. Braavos, the Secret City, she thought. The name seemed very apt. She crept down the  steep steps to the covered dock, the mists swirling round her feet. It was so foggy she could not  see the water, but she heard it lapping softly at stone pilings. In the distance, a light glowed  through the gloom: the nightfire at the temple of the red priests, she thought.  At the water's edge she stopped, the silver fork in hand. It was real silver, solid through and  through. It's not my fork. It was Salty that he gave it to. She tossed it underhand, heard the soft  plop as it sank below the water.   Her floppy hat went next, then the gloves. They were Salty's too. She emptied her pouch into  her palm; five silver stags, nine copper stars, some pennies and halfpennies and groats. She  scattered them across the water. Next her boots. They made the loudest splashes. Her dagger  followed, the one she'd gotten off the archer who had begged the Hound for mercy. Her  swordbelt went into the canal. Her cloak, tunic, breeches, smallclothes, all of it. All but Needle.  She stood on the end of the dock, pale and goosefleshed and shivering in the fog. In her hand,  Needle seemed to whisper to her. Stick them with the pointy end, it said, and, don't tell Sansa!  Mikken's mark was on the blade. It's just a sword. If she needed a sword, there were a hundred  under the temple. Needle was too small to be a proper sword, it was hardly more than a toy.  She'd been a stupid little girl when Jon had it made for her. It's just a sword, she said, aloud  this time...  ... but it wasn't.  Needle was Robb and Bran and Rickon, her mother and her father, even Sansa. Needle was  Winterfell's grey walls, and the laughter of its people. Needle was the summer snows, Old Nan's  stories, the heart tree with its red leaves and scary face, the warm earthy smell of the glass  gardens, the sound of the north wind rattling the shutters of her room. Needle was Jon Snow's  smile. He used to mess my hair and call me little sister, she remembered, and suddenly there  were tears in her eyes.  Polliver had stolen the sword from her when the Mountain's men took her captive, but when  she and the Hound walked into the inn at the crossroads, there it was. The gods wanted me to  have it. Not the Seven, nor Him of Many Faces, but her father's gods, the old gods of the north.  The Many-Faced God can have the rest, she thought, but he can't have this.  She padded up the steps as naked as her name day, clutching Needle. Halfway up, one of the  stones rocked beneath her feet. Arya knelt and dug around its edges with her fingers. It would  not move at first, but she persisted, picking at the crumbling mortar with her nails. Finally, the  stone shifted. She grunted and got both hands in and pulled. A crack opened before her.  You'll be safe here, she told Needle. No one will know where you are but me. She pushed  the sword and sheath behind the step, then shoved the stone back into place, so it looked like all  the other stones. As she climbed back to the temple, she counted steps, so she would know where  to find the sword again. One day she might have need of it. One day, she whispered to herself.  She never told the kindly man what she had done, yet he knew. The next night he came to her  cell after supper. Child, he said, come sit with me. I have a tale to tell you.  What kind of tale? she asked, wary.  The tale of our beginnings. If you would be one of us, you had best know who we are and how  we came to be. Men may whisper of the Faceless Men of Braavos, but we are older than the  Secret City. Before the Titan rose, before the Unmasking of Uthero, before the Founding, we  were. We have flowered in Braavos amongst these northern fogs, but we first took root in  Valyria, amongst the wretched slaves who toiled in the deep mines beneath the Fourteen Flames  that lit the Freehold's nights of old. Most mines are dank and chilly places, cut from cold dead  stone, but the Fourteen Flames were living mountains with veins of molten rock and hearts of   fire. So the mines of old Valyria were always hot, and they grew hotter as the shafts were driven  deeper, ever deeper. The slaves toiled in an oven. The rocks around them were too hot to touch.  The air stank of brimstone and would sear their lungs as they breathed it. The soles of their feet  would burn and blister, even through the thickest sandals. Sometimes, when they broke through a  wall in search of gold, they would find steam instead, or boiling water, or molten rock. Certain  shafts were cut so low that the slaves could not stand upright, but had to crawl or bend. And  there were wyrms in that red darkness too.  Earthworms? she asked, frowning.  Firewyrms. Some say they are akin to dragons, for wyrms breathe fire too. Instead of soaring  through the sky, they bore through stone and soil. If the old tales can be believed, there were  wyrms amongst the Fourteen Flames even before the dragons came. The young ones are no  larger than that skinny arm of yours, but they can grow to monstrous size and have no love for  men.  Did they kill the slaves?  Burnt and blackened corpses were oft found in shafts where the rocks were cracked or full of  holes. Yet still the mines drove deeper. Slaves perished by the score, but their masters did not  care. Red gold and yellow gold and silver were reckoned to be more precious than the lives of  slaves, for slaves were cheap in the old Freehold. During war, the Valyrians took them by the  thousands. In times of peace they bred them, though only the worst were sent down to die in the  red darkness.  Didn't the slaves rise up and fight?  Some did, he said. Revolts were common in the mines, but few accomplished much. The  dragonlords of the old Freehold were strong in sorcery, and lesser men defied them at their peril.  The first Faceless Man was one who did.  Who was he? Arya blurted, before she stopped to think.  No one, he answered. Some say he was a slave himself. Others insist he was a freeholder's  son, born of noble stock. Some will even tell you he was an overseer who took pity on his  charges. The truth is, no one knows. Whoever he was, he moved amongst the slaves and would  hear them at their prayers. Men of a hundred different nations labored in the mines, and each  prayed to his own god in his own tongue, yet all were praying for the same thing. It was release  they asked for, an end to pain. A small thing, and simple. Yet their gods made no answer, and  their suffering went on. Are their gods all deaf? he wondered... until a realization came upon  him, one night in the red darkness.  All gods have their instruments, men and women who serve them and help to work their will  on earth. The slaves were not crying out to a hundred different gods, as it seemed, but to one god  with a hundred different faces... and he was that god's instrument. That very night he chose the  most wretched of the slaves, the one who had prayed most earnestly for release, and freed him  from his bondage. The first gift had been given.  Arya drew back from him. He killed the slave? That did not sound right. He should have  killed the masters!   He would bring the gift to them as well... but that is a tale for another day, one best shared  with no one. He cocked his head. And who are you, child?  No one.  A lie.  How do you know? Is it magic?  A man does not need to be a wizard to know truth from falsehood, not if he has eyes. You  need only learn to read a face. Look at the eyes. The mouth. The muscles here, at the corners of  the jaw, and here, where the neck joins the shoulders. He touched her lightly with two fingers.  Some liars blink. Some stare. Some look away. Some lick their lips. Many cover their mouths  just before they tell a lie, as if to hide their deceit. Other signs may be more subtle, but they are  always there. A false smile and a true one may look alike, but they are as different as dusk from  dawn. Can you tell dusk from dawn?  Arya nodded, though she was not certain that she could.  Then you can learn to see a lie... and once you do, no secret will be safe from you.  Teach me. She would be no one if that was what it took. No one had no holes inside her.  She will teach you, said the kindly man as the waif appeared outside her door. Starting with  the tongue of Braavos. What use are you if you cannot speak or understand? And you shall teach  her your own tongue. The two of you shall learn together, each from the other. Will you do  this?  Yes, she said, and from that moment she was a novice in the House of Black and White. Her  servant's garb was taken away, and she was given a robe to wear, a robe of black and white as  buttery soft as the old red blanket she'd once had at Winterfell. Beneath it she wore smallclothes  of fine white linen, and a black undertunic that hung down past her knees.  Thereafter she and the waif spent their time together touching things and pointing, as each tried  to teach the other a few words of her own tongue. Simple words at first, cup and candle and  shoe; then harder words; then sentences. Once Syrio Forel used to make Arya stand on one leg  until she was trembling. Later he sent her chasing after cats. She had danced the water dance on  the limbs of trees, a stick sword in her hand. Those things had all been hard, but this was harder.  Even sewing was more fun than tongues, she told herself, after a night when she had forgotten  half the words she thought she knew, and pronounced the other half so badly that the waif had  laughed at her. My sentences are as crooked as my stitches used to be. If the girl had not been so  small and starved, Arya would have smashed her stupid face. Instead she gnawed her lip. Too  stupid to learn and too stupid to give up.  The Common Tongue came to the waif more quickly. One day at supper she turned to Arya,  and asked, Who are you?  No one, Arya answered, in Braavosi.  You lie, said the waif. You must lie gooder.  Arya laughed. Gooder? You mean better, stupid.  Better stupid. I will show you.   The next day they began the lying game, asking questions of one another, taking turns.  Sometimes they would answer truly, sometimes they would lie. The questioner had to try and tell  what was true and what was false. The waif always seemed to know. Arya had to guess. Most of  the time she guessed wrong.  How many years have you? the waif asked her once, in the Common Tongue. Ten, said  Arya, and raised ten fingers. She thought she was still ten, though it was hard to know for  certain. The Braavosi counted days differently than they did in Westeros. For all she knew her  name day had come and gone.  The waif nodded. Arya nodded back, and in her best Braavosi said, How many years have  you?  The waif showed ten fingers. Then ten again, and yet again. Then six. Her face remained as  smooth as still water. She can't be six-and-thirty, Arya thought. She's a little girl. You're  lying, she said. The waif shook her head and showed her once again: ten and ten and ten and  six. She said the words for six-and-thirty, and made Arya say them too.  The next day she told the kindly man what the waif had claimed. She did not lie, the priest  said, chuckling. The one you call waif is a woman grown who has spent her life serving Him of  Many Faces. She gave Him all she was, all she ever might have been, all the lives that were  within her.  Arya bit her lip. Will I be like her?  No, he said, not unless you wish it. It is the poisons that have made her as you see her.  Poisons. She understood then. Every evening after prayer the waif emptied a stone flagon into  the waters of the black pool.  The waif and kindly man were not the only servants of the Many-Faced God. From time to time  others would visit the House of Black and White. The fat fellow had fierce black eyes, a hook  nose, and a wide mouth full of yellow teeth. The stern face never smiled; his eyes were pale, his  lips full and dark. The handsome man had a beard of a different color every time she saw him,  and a different nose, but he was never less than comely. Those three came most often, but there  were others: the squinter, the lordling, the starved man. One time the fat fellow and the squinter  came together. Umma sent Arya to pour for them. When you are not pouring, you must stand as  still as if you had been carved of stone, the kindly man told her. Can you do that?  Yes. Before you can learn to move you must learn to be still, Syrio Forel had taught her long  ago at King's Landing, and she had. She had served as Roose Bolton's cupbearer at Harrenhal,  and he would flay you if you spilled his wine.  Good, the kindly man said. It would be best if you were blind and deaf as well. You may  hear things, but you must let them pass in one ear and out the other. Do not listen.  Arya heard much and more that night, but almost all of it was in the tongue of Braavos, and she  hardly understood one word in ten. Still as stone, she told herself. The hardest part was  struggling not to yawn. Before the night was done, her wits were wandering. Standing there with  the flagon in her hands, she dreamed she was a wolf, running free through a moonlit forest with a  great pack howling at her heels.   Are the other men all priests? she asked the kindly man the next morning. Were those their  real faces?  What do you think, child?  She thought no. Is Jaqen H'ghar a priest too? Do you know if Jaqen will be coming back to  Braavos?  Who? he said, all innocence.  Jaqen H'ghar. He gave me the iron coin.  I know no one by this name, child.  I asked him how he changed his face, and he said it was no harder than taking a new name, if  you knew the way.  Did he?  Will you show me how to change my face?  If you wish. He cupped her chin in his hand and turned her head. Puff up your cheeks and  stick out your tongue.  Arya puffed up her cheeks and stuck out her tongue.  There. Your face is changed.  That's not how I meant. Jaqen used magic.  All sorcery comes at a cost, child. Years of prayer and sacrifice and study are required to work  a proper glamor.  Years? she said, dismayed.  If it were easy all men would do it. You must walk before you run. Why use a spell, where  mummer's tricks will serve?  I don't know any mummer's tricks either.  Then practice making faces. Beneath your skin are muscles. Learn to use them. It is your face.  Your cheeks, your lips, your ears. Smiles and scowls should not come upon you like sudden  squalls. A smile should be a servant, and come only when you call it. Learn to rule your face.  Show me how.  Puff up your cheeks. She did. Lift your eyebrows. No, higher. She did that too. Good. See  how long you can hold that. It will not be long. Try it again on the morrow. You will find a  Myrish mirror in the vaults. Train before it for an hour every day. Eyes, nostrils, cheeks, ears,  lips, learn to rule them all. He cupped her chin. Who are you?  No one.  A lie. A sad little lie, child.  She found the Myrish mirror the next day, and every morn and every night she sat before it with  a candle on each side of her, making faces. Rule your face, she told herself, and you can lie.  Soon thereafter the kindly man commanded her to help the other acolytes prepare the corpses.  The work was not near as hard as scrubbing steps for Weese. Sometimes if the corpse was big or  fat she would struggle with the weight, but most of the dead were old dry bones in wrinkled  skins. Arya would look at them as she washed them, wondering what brought them to the black  pool. She remembered a tale she had heard from Old Nan, about how sometimes during a long   winter men who'd lived beyond their years would announce that they were going hunting. And  their daughters would weep and their sons would turn their faces to the fire, she could hear Old  Nan saying, but no one would stop them, or ask what game they meant to hunt, with the snows  so deep and the cold wind howling. She wondered what the old Braavosi told their sons and  daughters, before they set off for the House of Black and White.  The moon turned and turned again, though Arya never saw it. She served, washed the dead,  made faces at the mirrors, learned the Braavosi tongue, and tried to remember that she was no  one.  One day the kindly man sent for her. Your accent is a horror, he said, but you have enough  words to make your wants understood after a fashion. It is time that you left us for a while. The  only way you will ever truly master our tongue is if you speak it every day from dawn to dusk.  You must go.  When? she asked him. Where?  Now, he answered. Beyond these walls you will find the hundred isles of Braavos in the sea.  You have been taught the words for mussels, cockles, and clams, have you not?  Yes. She repeated them, in her best Braavosi.  Her best Braavosi made him smile. It will serve. Along the wharves below the Drowned Town  you will find a fishmonger named Brusco, a good man with a bad back. He has need of a girl to  push his barrow and sell his cockles, clams, and mussels to the sailors off the ships. You shall be  that girl. Do you understand?  Yes.  And when Brusco asks, who are you?  No one.  No. That will not serve, outside this House.  She hesitated. I could be Salty, from Saltpans.  Salty is known to Ternesio Terys and the men of the Titan's Daughter. You are marked by the  way you speak, so you must be some girl of Westeros... but a different girl, I think.  She bit her lip. Could I be Cat?  Cat. He considered. Yes. Braavos is full of cats. One more will not be noticed. You are Cat,  an orphan of...  King's Landing. She had visited White Harbor with her father twice, but she knew King's  Landing better.  Just so. Your father was oarmaster on a galley. When your mother died, he took you off to sea  with him. Then he died as well, and his captain had no use for you, so he put you off the ship in  Braavos. And what was the name of the ship?  Nymeria, she said at once.  That night she left the House of Black and White. A long iron knife rode on her right hip,  hidden by her cloak, a patched and faded thing of the sort an orphan might wear. Her shoes  pinched her toes and her tunic was so threadbare that the wind cut right through it. But Braavos  lay before her. The night air smelled of smoke and salt and fish. The canals were crooked, the   alleys crookeder. Men gave her curious looks as she went past, and beggar children called out  words she could not understand. Before long she was completely lost.  Ser Gregor, she chanted, as she crossed a stone bridge supported by four arches. From the  center of its span she could see the masts of ships in the Ragman's Harbor. Dunsen, Raff the  Sweetling, Ser Ilyn, Ser Meryn, Queen Cersei. Rain began to fall. Arya turned her face up to let  the raindrops wash her cheeks, so happy she could dance. Valar morghulis, she said, valar  morghulis, valar morghulis.  