 Are we there yet?  Bran never said the words aloud, but they were often on his lips as their ragged company  trudged through groves of ancient oaks and towering grey-green sentinels, past gloomy soldier pines  and bare brown chestnut trees. Are we near? the boy would wonder, as Hodor clambered up a stony  slope, or descended into some dark crevice where drifts of dirty snow cracked beneath his feet. How  much farther? he would think, as the great elk splashed across a half-frozen stream. How much longer?  It’s so cold. Where is the three-eyed crow?  Swaying in his wicker basket on Hodor’s back, the boy hunched down, ducking his head as the  big stableboy passed beneath the limb of an oak. The snow was falling again, wet and heavy. Hodor  walked with one eye frozen shut, his thick brown beard a tangle of hoarfrost, icicles drooping from the  ends of his bushy mustache. One gloved hand still clutched the rusty iron longsword he had taken from  the crypts below Winterfell, and from time to time he would lash out at a branch, knocking loose a spray  of snow. “Hod-d-d-dor,” he would mutter, his teeth chattering.  The sound was strangely reassuring. On their journey from Winterfell to the Wall, Bran and his  companions had made the miles shorter by talking and telling tales, but it was different here. Even  Hodor felt it. His hodors came less often than they had south of the Wall. There was a stillness to this  wood like nothing Bran had ever known before. Before the snows began, the north wind would swirl  around them and clouds of dead brown leaves would kick up from the ground with a faint small rustling  sound that reminded him of roaches scurrying in a cupboard, but now all the leaves were buried under a  blanket of white. From time to time a raven would fly overhead, big black wings slapping against the  cold air. Elsewise the world was silent.  Just ahead, the elk wove between the snowdrifts with his head down, his huge rack of antlers  crusted with ice. The ranger sat astride his broad back, grim and silent. Coldhands was the name that the  fat boy Sam had given him, for though the ranger’s face was pale, his hands were black and hard as iron,  and cold as iron too. The rest of him was wrapped in layers of wool and boiled leather and ringmail, his  features shadowed by his hooded cloak and a black woolen scarf about the lower half of his face.  Behind the ranger, Meera Reed wrapped her arms around her brother, to shelter him from the  wind and cold with the warmth of her own body. A crust of frozen snot had formed below Jojen’s nose,  and from time to time he shivered violently. He looks so small, Bran thought, as he watched him sway.  He looks smaller than me now, and weaker too, and I’m the cripple.  Summer brought up the rear of their little band. The direwolf’s breath frosted the forest air as  he padded after them, still limping on the hind leg that had taken the arrow back at Queenscrown. Bran  felt the pain of the old wound whenever he slipped inside the big wolf’s skin. Of late Bran wore  Summer’s body more often than his own; the wolf felt the bite of the cold, despite the thickness of his   fur, but he could see farther and hear better and smell more than the boy in the basket, bundled up like  a babe in swaddling clothes.  Other times, when he was tired of being a wolf, Bran slipped into Hodor’s skin instead. The  gentle giant would whimper when he felt him, and thrash his shaggy head from side to side, but not as  violently as he had the first time, back at Queenscrown. He knows it’s me, the boy liked to tell himself.  He’s used to me by now. Even so, he never felt comfortable inside Hodor’s skin. The big stableboy never  understood what was happening, and Bran could taste the fear at the back of his mouth. It was better  inside Summer. I am him, and he is me. He feels what I feel.  Sometimes Bran could sense the direwolf sniffing after the elk, wondering if he could bring the  great beast down. Summer had grown accustomed to horses at Winterfell, but this was an elk and elk  were prey. The direwolf could sense the warm blood coursing beneath the elk’s shaggy hide. Just the  smell was enough to make the slaver run from between his jaws, and when it did Bran’s mouth would  water at the thought of rich, dark meat.  From a nearby oak a raven quorked, and Bran heard the sound of wings as another of the big  black birds flapped down to land beside it. By day only half a dozen ravens stayed with them, flitting  from tree to tree or riding on the antlers of the elk. The rest of the murder flew ahead or lingered  behind. But when the sun sank low they would return, descending from the sky on night-black wings  until every branch of every tree was thick with them for yards around. Some would fly to the ranger and  mutter at him, and it seemed to Bran that he understood their quorks and squawks. They are his eyes  and ears. They scout for him, and whisper to him of dangers ahead and behind.  As now. The elk stopped suddenly, and the ranger vaulted lightly from his back to land in  knee-deep snow. Summer growled at him, his fur bristling. The direwolf did not like the way that  Coldhands smelled. Dead meat, dry blood, a faint whiff of rot. And cold. Cold over all.  “What is it?” Meera wanted to know.  “Behind us,” Coldhands announced, his voice muffled by the black wool scarf across his nose  and mouth.  “Wolves?” Bran asked. They had known for days that they were being followed. Every night they  heard the mournful howling of the pack, and every night the wolves seemed a little closer. Hunters, and  hungry. They can smell how weak we are. Often Bran woke shivering hours before the dawn, listening to  the sound of them calling to one another in the distance as he waited for the sun to rise. If there are  wolves, there must be prey, he used to think, until it came to him that they were the prey.  The ranger shook his head. “Men. The wolves still keep their distance. These men are not so  shy.”  Meera Reed pushed back her hood. The wet snow that had covered it tumbled to the ground  with a soft thump. “How many men? Who are they?”   “Foes. I’ll deal with them.”  “I’ll come with you.”  “You’ll stay. The boy must be protected. There is a lake ahead, hard frozen. When you come on  it, turn north and follow the shoreline. You’ll come to a fishing village. Take refuge there until I can catch  up with you.”  Bran thought that Meera meant to argue until her brother said, “Do as he says. He knows this  land.” Jojen’s eyes were a dark green, the color of moss, but heavy with a weariness that Bran had never  seen in them before. The little grandfather. South of the Wall, the boy from the crannogs had seemed to  be wise beyond his years, but up here he was as lost and frightened as the rest of them. Even so, Meera  always listened to him.  That was still true. Coldhands slipped between the trees, back the way they’d come, with four  ravens flapping after him. Meera watched him go, her cheeks red with cold, breath puffing from her  nostrils. She pulled her hood back up and gave the elk a nudge, and their trek resumed. Before they had  gone twenty yards, though, she turned to glance behind them and said, “Men, he says. What men? Does  he mean wildlings? Why won’t he say?”  “He said he’d go and deal with them,” said Bran.  “He said, aye. He said he would take us to this three-eyed crow too. That river we crossed this  morning is the same one we crossed four days ago, I swear. We’re going in circles.”  “Rivers turn and twist,” Bran said uncertainly, “and where there’s lakes and hills, you need to go  around.”  “There’s been too much going around,” Meera insisted, “and too many secrets. I don’t like it. I  don’t like him. And I don’t trust him. Those hands of his are bad enough. He hides his face, and will not  speak a name. Who is he? What is he? Anyone can put on a black cloak. Anyone, or any thing. He does  not eat, he never drinks, he does not seem to feel the cold.”  It’s true. Bran had been afraid to speak of it, but he had noticed. Whenever they took shelter for  the night, while he and Hodor and the Reeds huddled together for warmth, the ranger kept apart.  Sometimes Cold-hands closed his eyes, but Bran did not think he slept. And there was something else …  “The scarf.” Bran glanced about uneasily, but there was not a raven to be seen. All the big black  birds had left them when the ranger did. No one was listening. Even so, he kept his voice low. “The scarf  over his mouth, it never gets all hard with ice, like Hodor’s beard. Not even when he talks.”  Meera gave him a sharp look. “You’re right. We’ve never seen his breath, have we?”  “No.” A puff of white heralded each of Hodor’s hodors. When Jojen or his sister spoke, their  words could be seen too. Even the elk left a warm fog upon the air when he exhaled.   “If he does not breathe …”  Bran found himself remembering the tales Old Nan had told him when he was a babe. Beyond  the Wall the monsters live, the giants and the ghouls, the stalking shadows and the dead that walk, she  would say, tucking him in beneath his scratchy woolen blanket, but they cannot pass so long as the Wall  stands strong and the men of the Night’s Watch are true. So go to sleep, my little Brandon, my baby boy,  and dream sweet dreams. There are no monsters here. The ranger wore the black of the Night’s Watch,  but what if he was not a man at all? What if he was some monster, taking them to the other monsters to  be devoured?  “The ranger saved Sam and the girl from the wights,” Bran said, hesitantly, “and he’s taking me  to the three-eyed crow.”  “Why won’t this three-eyed crow come to us? Why couldn’t he meet us at the Wall? Crows have  wings. My brother grows weaker every day. How long can we go on?”  Jojen coughed. “Until we get there.”  They came upon the promised lake not long after, and turned north as the ranger had bid them.  That was the easy part.  The water was frozen, and the snow had been falling for so long that Bran had lost count of the  days, turning the lake into a vast white wilderness. Where the ice was flat and the ground was bumpy,  the going was easy, but where the wind had pushed the snow up into ridges, sometimes it was hard to  tell where the lake ended and the shore began. Even the trees were not as infallible a guide as they  might have hoped, for there were wooded islands in the lake, and wide areas ashore where no trees  grew.  The elk went where he would, regardless of the wishes of Meera and Jojen on his back. Mostly  he stayed beneath the trees, but where the shore curved away westward he would take the more direct  path across the frozen lake, shouldering through snowdrifts taller than Bran as the ice crackled  underneath his hooves. Out there the wind was stronger, a cold north wind that howled across the lake,  knifed through their layers of wool and leather, and set them all to shivering. When it blew into their  faces, it would drive the snow into their eyes and leave them as good as blind.  Hours passed in silence. Ahead, shadows began to steal between the trees, the long fingers of  the dusk. Dark came early this far north. Bran had come to dread that. Each day seemed shorter than  the last, and where the days were cold, the nights were bitter cruel.  Meera halted them again. “We should have come on the village by now.” Her voice sounded  hushed and strange.  “Could we have passed it?” Bran asked. “I hope not. We need to find shelter before nightfall.”   She was not wrong. Jojen’s lips were blue, Meera’s cheeks dark red. Bran’s own face had gone  numb. Hodor’s beard was solid ice. Snow caked his legs almost to the knee, and Bran had felt him  stagger more than once. No one was as strong as Hodor, no one. If even his great strength was failing …  “Summer can find the village,” Bran said suddenly, his words misting in the air. He did not wait  to hear what Meera might say, but closed his eyes and let himself flow from his broken body.  As he slipped inside Summer’s skin, the dead woods came to sudden life. Where before there  had been silence, now he heard: wind in the trees, Hodor’s breathing, the elk pawing at the ground in  search of fodder. Familiar scents filled his nostrils: wet leaves and dead grass, the rotted carcass of a  squirrel decaying in the brush, the sour stink of man-sweat, the musky odor of the elk. Food. Meat. The  elk sensed his interest. He turned his head toward the direwolf, wary, and lowered his great antlers.  He is not prey, the boy whispered to the beast who shared his skin. Leave him. Run.  Summer ran. Across the lake he raced, his paws kicking up sprays of snow behind him. The trees  stood shoulder to shoulder, like men in a battle line, all cloaked in white. Over roots and rocks the  direwolf sped, through a drift of old snow, the crust crackling beneath his weight. His paws grew wet  and cold. The next hill was covered with pines, and the sharp scent of their needles filled the air. When  he reached the top, he turned in a circle, sniffing at the air, then raised his head and howled.  The smells were there. Mansmells.  Ashes, Bran thought, old and faint, but ashes. It was the smell of burnt wood, soot, and charcoal.  A dead fire.  He shook the snow off his muzzle. The wind was gusting, so the smells were hard to follow. The  wolf turned this way and that, sniffing. All around were heaps of snow and tall trees garbed in white.  The wolf let his tongue loll out between his teeth, tasting the frigid air, his breath misting as snow-flakes  melted on his tongue. When he trotted toward the scent, Hodor lumbered after him at once. The elk  took longer to decide, so Bran returned reluctantly to his own body and said, “That way. Follow  Summer. I smelled it.”  As the first sliver of a crescent moon came peeking through the clouds, they finally stumbled  into the village by the lake. They had almost walked straight through it. From the ice, the village looked  no different than a dozen other spots along the lakeshore. Buried under drifts of snow, the round stone  houses could just as easily have been boulders or hillocks or fallen logs, like the deadfall that Jojen had  mistaken for a building the day before, until they dug down into it and found only broken branches and  rotting logs.  The village was empty, abandoned by the wildlings who had once lived there, like all the other  villages they had passed. Some had been burned, as if the inhabitants had wanted to make certain they  could not come creeping back, but this one had been spared the torch. Beneath the snow they found a  dozen huts and a longhall, with its sod roof and thick walls of rough-hewn logs.   “At least we will be out of the wind,” Bran said.  “Hodor,” said Hodor.  Meera slid down from the elk’s back. She and her brother helped lift Bran out of the wicker  basket. “Might be the wildlings left some food behind,” she said.  That proved a forlorn hope. Inside the longhall they found the ashes of a fire, floors of  hard-packed dirt, a chill that went bone deep. But at least they had a roof above their heads and log  walls to keep the wind off. A stream ran nearby, covered with a film of ice. The elk had to crack it with  his hoof to drink. Once Bran and Jojen and Hodor were safely settled, Meera fetched back some chunks  of broken ice for them to suck on. The melting water was so cold it made Bran shudder.  Summer did not follow them into the longhall. Bran could feel the big wolf’s hunger, a shadow  of his own. “Go hunt,” he told him, “but you leave the elk alone.” Part of him was wishing he could go  hunting too. Perhaps he would, later.  Supper was a fistful of acorns, crushed and pounded into paste, so bitter that Bran gagged as he  tried to keep it down. Jojen Reed did not even make the attempt. Younger and frailer than his sister, he  was growing weaker by the day.  “Jojen, you have to eat,” Meera told him. “Later. I just want to rest.” Jojen smiled a wan smile.  “This is not the day I die, sister. I promise you.”  “You almost fell off the elk.”  “Almost. I am cold and hungry, that’s all.”  “Then eat.”  “Crushed acorns? My belly hurts, but that will only make it worse. Leave me be, sister. I’m  dreaming of roast chicken.”  “Dreams will not sustain you. Not even greendreams.”  “Dreams are what we have.”  All we have. The last of the food that they had brought from the south was ten days gone. Since  then hunger walked beside them day and night. Even Summer could find no game in these woods. They  lived on crushed acorns and raw fish. The woods were full of frozen streams and cold black lakes, and  Meera was as good a fisher with her three-pronged frog spear as most men were with hook and line.  Some days her lips were blue with cold by the time she waded back to them with her catch wriggling on  her tines. It had been three days since Meera caught a fish, however. Bran’s belly felt so hollow it might  have been three years.   After they choked down their meagre supper, Meera sat with her back against a wall,  sharpening her dagger on a whetstone. Hodor squatted down beside the door, rocking back and forth  on his haunches and muttering, “Hodor, hodor, hodor.”  Bran closed his eyes. It was too cold to talk, and they dare not light a fire. Coldhands had warned  them against that. These woods are not as empty as you think, he had said. You cannot know what the  light might summon from the darkness. The memory made him shiver, despite the warmth of Hodor  beside him.  Sleep would not come, could not come. Instead there was wind, the biting cold, moonlight on  snow, and fire. He was back inside Summer, long leagues away, and the night was rank with the smell of  blood. The scent was strong. A kill, not far. The flesh would still be warm. Slaver ran between his teeth  as the hunger woke inside him. Not elk. Not deer. Not this.  The direwolf moved toward the meat, a gaunt grey shadow sliding from tree to tree, through  pools of moonlight and over mounds of snow. The wind gusted around him, shifting. He lost the scent,  found it, then lost it again. As he searched for it once more, a distant sound made his ears prick up.  Wolf, he knew at once. Summer stalked toward the sound, wary now. Soon enough the scent of  blood was back, but now there were other smells: piss and dead skins, bird shit, feathers, and wolf, wolf,  wolf. A pack. He would need to fight for his meat.  They smelled him too. As he moved out from amongst the darkness of the trees into the bloody  glade, they were watching him. The female was chewing on a leather boot that still had half a leg in it,  but she let it fall at his approach. The leader of the pack, an old male with a grizzled white muzzle and a  blind eye, moved out to meet him, snarling, his teeth bared. Behind him, a younger male showed his  fangs as well.  The direwolf’s pale yellow eyes drank in the sights around them. A nest of entrails coiled  through a bush, entangled with the branches. Steam rising from an open belly, rich with the smells of  blood and meat. A head staring sightlessly up at a horned moon, cheeks ripped and torn down to bloody  bone, pits for eyes, neck ending in a ragged stump. A pool of frozen blood, glistening red and black.  Men. The stink of them filled the world. Alive, they had been as many as the fingers on a man’s  paw, but now they were none. Dead. Done. Meat. Cloaked and hooded, once, but the wolves had torn  their clothing into pieces in their frenzy to get at the flesh. Those who still had faces wore thick beards  crusted with ice and frozen snot. The falling snow had begun to bury what remained of them, so pale  against the black of ragged cloaks and breeches. Black.  Long leagues away, the boy stirred uneasily.  Black. Night’s Watch. They were Night’s Watch.  The direwolf did not care. They were meat. He was hungry.   The eyes of the three wolves glowed yellow. The direwolf swung his head from side to side,  nostrils flaring, then bared his fangs in a snarl. The younger male backed away. The direwolf could smell  the fear in him. Tail, he knew. But the one-eyed wolf answered with a growl and moved to block his  advance. Head. And he does not fear me though I am twice his size.  Their eyes met.  Warg!  Then the two rushed together, wolf and direwolf, and there was no more time for thought. The  world shrank down to tooth and claw, snow flying as they rolled and spun and tore at one another, the  other wolves snarling and snapping around them. His jaws closed on matted fur slick with hoarfrost, on  a limb thin as a dry stick, but the one-eyed wolf clawed at his belly and tore himself free, rolled, lunged  for him. Yellow fangs snapped closed on his throat, but he shook off his old grey cousin as he would a  rat, then charged after him, knocked him down. Rolling, ripping, kicking, they fought until the both of  them were ragged and fresh blood dappled the snows around them. But finally the old one-eyed wolf  lay down and showed his belly. The direwolf snapped at him twice more, sniffed at his butt, then lifted a  leg over him.  A few snaps and a warning growl, and the female and the tail submitted too. The pack was his.  The prey as well. He went from man to man, sniffing, before settling on the biggest, a faceless  thing who clutched black iron in one hand. His other hand was missing, severed at the wrist, the stump  bound up in leather. Blood flowed thick and sluggish from the slash across his throat. The wolf lapped at  it with his tongue, licked the ragged eyeless ruin of his nose and cheeks, then buried his muzzle in his  neck and tore it open, gulping down a gobbet of sweet meat. No flesh had ever tasted half as good.  When he was done with that one, he moved to the next, and devoured the choicest bits of that  man too. Ravens watched him from the trees, squatting dark-eyed and silent on the branches as snow  drifted down around them. The other wolves made do with his leavings; the old male fed first, then the  female, then the tail. They were his now. They were pack.  No, the boy whispered, we have another pack. Lady’s dead and maybe Grey Wind too, but  somewhere there’s still Shaggydog and Nymeria and Ghost. Remember Ghost?  Falling snow and feasting wolves began to dim. Warmth beat against his face, comforting as a  mother’s kisses. Fire, he thought, smoke. His nose twitched to the smell of roasting meat. And then the  forest fell away, and he was back in the longhall again, back in his broken body, staring at a fire. Meera  Reed was turning a chunk of raw red flesh above the flames, letting it char and spit. “Just in time,” she  said. Bran rubbed his eyes with the heel of his hand and wriggled backwards against the wall to sit. “You  almost slept through supper. The ranger found a sow.”  Behind her, Hodor was tearing eagerly at a chunk of hot charred flesh as blood and grease ran  down into his beard. Wisps of smoke rose from between his fingers. “Hodor,” he muttered between   bites, “hodor, hodor.” His sword lay on the earthen floor beside him. Jojen Reed nipped at his own joint  with small bites, chewing each chunk of meat a dozen times before swallowing.  The ranger killed a pig. Coldhands stood beside the door, a raven on his arm, both staring at the  fire. Reflections from the flames glittered off four black eyes. He does not eat, Bran remembered, and he  fears the flames.  “You said no fire,” he reminded the ranger. “The walls around us hide the light, and dawn is  close. We will be on our way soon.”  “What happened to the men? The foes behind us?”  “They will not trouble you.”  “Who were they? Wildlings?”  Meera turned the meat to cook the other side. Hodor was chewing and swallowing, muttering  happily under his breath. Only Jojen seemed aware of what was happening as Coldhands turned his  head to stare at Bran. “They were foes.”  Men of the Night’s Watch. “You killed them. You and the ravens. Their faces were all torn, and  their eyes were gone.” Coldhands did not deny it. “They were your brothers. I saw. The wolves had  ripped their clothes up, but I could still tell. Their cloaks were black. Like your hands.” Cold-hands said  nothing. “Who are you? Why are your hands black?”  The ranger studied his hands as if he had never noticed them before. “Once the heart has  ceased to beat, a man’s blood runs down into his extremities, where it thickens and congeals.” His voice  rattled in his throat, as thin and gaunt as he was. “His hands and feet swell up and turn as black as  pudding. The rest of him becomes as white as milk.”  Meera Reed rose, her frog spear in her hand, a chunk of smoking meat still impaled upon its  tines. “Show us your face.”  The ranger made no move to obey.  “He’s dead.” Bran could taste the bile in his throat. “Meera, he’s some dead thing. The monsters  cannot pass so long as the Wall stands and the men of the Night’s Watch stay true, that’s what Old Nan  used to say. He came to meet us at the Wall, but he could not pass. He sent Sam instead, with that  wildling girl.”  Meera’s gloved hand tightened around the shaft of her frog spear. “Who sent you? Who is this  three-eyed crow?”  “A friend. Dreamer, wizard, call him what you will. The last green-seer.” The longhall’s wooden  door banged open. Outside, the night wind howled, bleak and black. The trees were full of ravens,  screaming. Cold-hands did not move.   “A monster,” Bran said.  The ranger looked at Bran as if the rest of them did not exist. “Your monster, Brandon Stark.”  “Yours,” the raven echoed, from his shoulder. Outside the door, the ravens in the trees took up  the cry, until the night wood echoed to the murderer’s song of “Yours, yours, yours.”  “Jojen, did you dream this?” Meera asked her brother. “Who is he? What is he? What do we do  now?”  “We go with the ranger,” said Jojen. “We have come too far to turn back now, Meera. We would  never make it back to the Wall alive. We go with Bran’s monster, or we die.”  Something about the way the raven screamed sent a shiver running up Bran’s spine. I am almost  a man grown, he had to remind himself. I have to be brave now.  But the air was sharp and cold and full of fear. Even Summer was afraid. The fur on his neck was  bristling. Shadows stretched against the hillside, black and hungry. All the trees were bowed and twisted  by the weight of ice they carried. Some hardly looked like trees at all. Buried from root to crown in  frozen snow, they huddled on the hill like giants, monstrous and misshapen creatures hunched against  the icy wind.  “They are here.” The ranger drew his longsword. “Where?” Meera’s voice was hushed. “Close. I  don’t know. Somewhere.”  The raven shrieked again. “Hodor,” whispered Hodor. He had his hands tucked up beneath his  armpits. Icicles hung from the brown briar of his beard, and his mustache was a lump of frozen snot,  glittering redly in the light of sunset.  “Those wolves are close as well,” Bran warned them. “The ones that have been following us.  Summer can smell them whenever we’re downwind.”  “Wolves are the least of our woes,” said Coldhands. “We have to climb. It will be dark soon. You  would do well to be inside before night comes. Your warmth will draw them.” He glanced to the west,  where the light of the setting sun could be seen dimly through the trees, like the glow of a distant fire.   “Is this the only way in?” asked Meera. “The back door is three leagues north, down a sinkhole.”  That was all he had to say. Not even Hodor could climb down into a sinkhole with Bran heavy on  his back, and Jojen could no more walk three leagues than run a thousand.  Meera eyed the hill above. “The way looks clear.”  “Looks,” the ranger muttered darkly. “Can you feel the cold? There’s something here. Where are  they?”  “Inside the cave?” suggested Meera. “The cave is warded. They cannot pass.” The ranger used  his sword to point. “You can see the entrance there. Halfway up, between the weir-woods, that cleft in  the rock.”  “I see it,” said Bran. Ravens were flying in and out.  Hodor shifted his weight. “Hodor.”  “A fold in the rock, that’s all I see,” said Meera. “There’s a passage there. Steep and twisty at  first, a runnel through the rock. If you can reach it, you’ll be safe.”  “What about you?”  “The cave is warded.”  Meera studied the cleft in the hillside. “It can’t be more than a thousand yards from here to  there.”  No, thought Bran, but all those yards are upward. The hill was steep and thickly wooded. The  snow had stopped three days ago, but none of it had melted. Beneath the trees, the ground was  blanketed in white, still pristine and unbroken. “No one’s here,” said Bran, bravely. “Look at the snow.  There are no footprints.”  “The white walkers go lightly on the snow,” the ranger said. “You’ll find no prints to mark their  passage.” A raven descended from above to settle on his shoulder. Only a dozen of the big black birds  remained with them. The rest had vanished along the way; every dawn when they arose, there had been  fewer of them. “Come,” the bird squawked. “Come, come.”  The three-eyed crow, thought Bran. The greenseer. “It’s not so far,” he said. “A little climb, and  we’ll be safe. Maybe we can have a fire.” All of them were cold and wet and hungry, except the ranger,  and Jojen Reed was too weak to walk unaided.  “You go.” Meera Reed bent down beside her brother. He was settled in the bole of an oak, eyes  closed, shivering violently. What little of his face could be seen beneath his hood and scarf was as  colorless as the surrounding snow, but breath still puffed faintly from his nostrils whenever he exhaled.  Meera had been carrying him all day. Food and fire will set him right again, Bran tried to tell himself,   though he wasn’t sure it would. “I can’t fight and carry Jojen both, the climb’s too steep,” Meera was  saying. “Hodor, you take Bran up to that cave.”  “Hodor.” Hodor clapped his hands together. “Jojen just needs to eat,” Bran said, miserably. It  had been twelve days since the elk had collapsed for the third and final time, since Coldhands had knelt  beside it in the snowbank and murmured a blessing in some strange tongue as he slit its throat. Bran  wept like a little girl when the bright blood came rushing out. He had never felt more like a cripple than  he did then, watching helplessly as Meera Reed and Coldhands butchered the brave beast who had  carried them so far. He told himself he would not eat, that it was better to go hungry than to feast upon  a friend, but in the end he’d eaten twice, once in his own skin and once in Summer’s. As gaunt and  starved as the elk had been, the steaks the ranger carved from him had sustained them for seven days,  until they finished the last of them huddled over a fire in the ruins of an old hillfort.  “He needs to eat,” Meera agreed, smoothing her brother’s brow. “We all do, but there’s no food  here. Go.”  Bran blinked back a tear and felt it freeze upon his cheek. Coldhands took Hodor by the arm.  “The light is fading. If they’re not here now, they will be soon. Come.”  Wordless for once, Hodor slapped the snow off his legs, and plowed upward through the  snowdrifts with Bran upon his back. Coldhands stalked beside them, his blade in a black hand. Summer  came after. In some places the snow was higher than he was, and the big direwolf had to stop and shake  it off after plunging through the thin crust. As they climbed, Bran turned awkwardly in his basket to  watch as Meera slid an arm beneath her brother to lift him to his feet. He’s too heavy for her. She’s  half-starved, she’s not as strong as she was. She clutched her frog spear in her other hand, jabbing the  tines into the snow for a little more support. Meera had just begun to struggle up the hill, half-dragging  and half-carrying her little brother, when Hodor passed between two trees, and Bran lost sight of them.  The hill grew steeper. Drifts of snow cracked under Hodor’s boots. Once a rock moved beneath  his foot and he slid backwards, and almost went tumbling back down the hill. The ranger caught him by  the arm and saved him. “Hodor,” said Hodor. Every gust of wind filled the air with fine white powder  that shone like glass in the last light of day. Ravens flapped around them. One flew ahead and vanished  inside the cave. Only eighty yards now, Bran thought, that’s not far at all.  Summer stopped suddenly, at the bottom of a steep stretch of unbroken white snow. The  direwolf turned his head, sniffed the air, then snarled. Fur bristling, he began to back away.  “Hodor, stop,” said Bran. “Hodor. Wait.” Something was wrong. Summer smelled it, and so did  he. Something bad. Something close. “Hodor, no, go back.”  Coldhands was still climbing, and Hodor wanted to keep up. “Hodor, hodor, hodor,” he  grumbled loudly, to drown out Bran’s complaints. His breathing had grown labored. Pale mist filled the  air. He took a step, then another. The snow was almost waist deep and the slope was very steep. Hodor   was leaning forward, grasping at rocks and trees with his hands as he climbed. Another step. Another.  The snow Hodor disturbed slid downhill, starting a small avalanche behind them.  Sixty yards. Bran craned himself sideways to better see the cave. Then he saw something else.  “A fire!” In the little cleft between the weirwood trees was a flickering glow, a ruddy light calling through  the gathering gloom. “Look, someone—”  Hodor screamed. He twisted, stumbled, fell.  Bran felt the world slide sideways as the big stableboy spun violently around. A jarring impact  drove the breath from him. His mouth was full of blood and Hodor was thrashing and rolling, crushing  the crippled boy beneath him.  Something has hold of his leg. For half a heartbeat Bran thought maybe a root had gotten  tangled round his ankle … until the root moved. A hand, he saw, as the rest of the wight came bursting  from beneath the snow.  Hodor kicked at it, slamming a snow-covered heel full into the thing’s face, but the dead man  did not even seem to feel it. Then the two of them were grappling, punching and clawing at each other,  sliding down the hill. Snow filled Bran’s mouth and nose as they rolled over, but in a half a heartbeat he  was rolling up again. Something slammed against his head, a rock or a chunk of ice or a dead man’s fist,  he could not tell, and he found himself out of his basket, sprawled across the hillside, spitting snow, his  gloved hand full of hair that he’d torn from Hodor’s head.  All around him, wights were rising from beneath the snow.  Two, three, four. Bran lost count. They surged up violently amidst sudden clouds of snow. Some  wore black cloaks, some ragged skins, some nothing. All of them had pale flesh and black hands. Their  eyes glowed like pale blue stars.  Three of them descended on the ranger. Bran saw Coldhands slash one across the face. The  thing kept right on coming, driving him back into the arms of another. Two more were going after  Hodor, lumbering clumsily down the slope. Meera was going to climb right into this, Bran realized, with  a sick sense of helpless terror. He smashed the snow and shouted out a warning.  Something grabbed hold of him.  That was when his shout became a scream. Bran filled a fist with snow and threw it, but the  wight did not so much as blink. A black hand fumbled at his face, another at his belly. Its fingers felt like  iron. He’s going to pull my guts out.  But suddenly Summer was between them. Bran glimpsed skin tear like cheap cloth, heard the  splintering of bone. He saw a hand and wrist rip loose, pale fingers wriggling, the sleeve faded black  roughspun. Black, he thought, he’s wearing black, he was one of the Watch. Summer flung the arm   aside, twisted, and sank his teeth into the dead man’s neck under the chin. When the big grey wolf  wrenched free, he took most of the creature’s throat out in an explosion of pale rotten meat.  The severed hand was still moving. Bran rolled away from it. On his belly, clawing at the snow,  he glimpsed the trees above, pale and snow-cloaked, the orange glow between.  Fifty yards. If he could drag himself fifty yards, they could not get him. Damp seeped through his  gloves as he clutched at roots and rocks, crawling toward the light. A little farther, just a little farther.  Then you can rest beside the fire.  The last light had vanished from amongst the trees by then. Night had fallen. Coldhands was  hacking and cutting at the circle of dead men that surrounded him. Summer was tearing at the one that  he’d brought down, its face between his teeth. No one was paying any mind to Bran. He crawled a little  higher, dragging his useless legs behind him. If I can reach that cave …  “Hoooodor” came a whimper, from somewhere down below.  And suddenly he was not Bran, the broken boy crawling through the snow, suddenly he was  Hodor halfway down the hill, with the wight raking at his eyes. Roaring, he came lurching to his feet,  throwing the thing violently aside. It went to one knee, began to rise again. Bran ripped Hodor’s  longsword from his belt. Deep inside he could hear poor Hodor whimpering still, but outside he was  seven feet of fury with old iron in his hand. He raised the sword and brought it down upon the dead  man, grunting as the blade sheared through wet wool and rusted mail and rotted leather, biting deep  into the bones and flesh beneath. “HODOR!” he bellowed, and slashed again. This time he took the  wight’s head off at the neck, and for half a moment he exulted … until a pair of dead hands came  groping blindly for his throat.  Bran backed away, bleeding, and Meera Reed was there, driving her frog spear deep into the  wight’s back. “Hodor,” Bran roared again, waving her uphill. “Hodor, hodor.” Jojen was twisting feebly  where she’d laid him down. Bran went to him, dropped the longsword, gathered the boy into Hodor’s  arm, and lurched back to his feet. “HODOR!” he bellowed.  Meera led the way back up the hill, jabbing at the wights when they came near. The things could  not be hurt, but they were slow and clumsy. “Hodor,” Hodor said with every step. “Hodor, hodor.” He  wondered what Meera would think if he should suddenly tell her that he loved her.  Up above them, flaming figures were dancing in the snow.  The wights, Bran realized. Someone set the wights on fire.  Summer was snarling and snapping as he danced around the closest, a great ruin of a man  wreathed in swirling flame. He shouldn’t get so close, what is he doing? Then he saw himself, sprawled  facedown in the snow. Summer was trying to drive the thing away from him. What will happen if it kills  me? the boy wondered. Will I be Hodor for good or all? Will I go back into Summer’s skin? Or will I just  be dead?   The world moved dizzily around him. White trees, black sky, red flames, everything was whirling,  shifting, spinning. He felt himself stumbling. He could hear Hodor screaming, “Hodor hodor hodor  hodor. Hodor hodor hodor hodor. Hodor hodor hodor hodor hodor.” A cloud of ravens was pouring  from the cave, and he saw a little girl with a torch in hand, darting this way and that. For a moment Bran  thought it was his sister Arya … madly, for he knew his little sister was a thousand leagues away, or  dead. And yet there she was, whirling, a scrawny thing, ragged, wild, her hair atangle. Tears filled  Hodor’s eyes and froze there.  Everything turned inside out and upside down, and Bran found himself back inside his own skin,  half-buried in the snow. The burning wight loomed over him, etched tall against the trees in their snowy  shrouds. It was one of the naked ones, Bran saw, in the instant before the nearest tree shook off the  snow that covered it and dropped it all down upon his head.  The next he knew, he was lying on a bed of pine needles beneath a dark stone roof. The cave.  I’m in the cave. His mouth still tasted of blood where he’d bitten his tongue, but a fire was burning to his  right, the heat washing over his face, and he had never felt anything so good. Summer was there,  sniffing round him, and Hodor, soaking wet. Meera cradled Jojen’s head in her lap. And the Arya thing  stood over them, clutching her torch.  “The snow,” Bran said. “It fell on me. Buried me.”  “Hid you. I pulled you out.” Meera nodded at the girl. “It was her who saved us, though. The  torch … fire kills them.”  “Fire burns them. Fire is always hungry.”  That was not Arya’s voice, nor any child’s. It was a woman’s voice, high and sweet, with a  strange music in it like none that he had ever heard and a sadness that he thought might break his heart.  Bran squinted, to see her better. It was a girl, but smaller than Arya, her skin dappled like a doe’s  beneath a cloak of leaves. Her eyes were queer—large and liquid, gold and green, slitted like a cat’s  eyes. No one has eyes like that. Her hair was a tangle of brown and red and gold, autumn colors, with  vines and twigs and withered flowers woven through it.  “Who are you?” Meera Reed was asking.  Bran knew. “She’s a child. A child of the forest.” He shivered, as much from wonderment as cold.  They had fallen into one of Old Nan’s tales.  “The First Men named us children,” the little woman said. “The giants called us woh dak nag  gran, the squirrel people, because we were small and quick and fond of trees, but we are no squirrels,  no children. Our name in the True Tongue means those who sing the song of earth. Before your Old  Tongue was ever spoken, we had sung our songs ten thousand years.”  Meera said, “You speak the Common Tongue now.”   “For him. The Bran boy. I was born in the time of the dragon, and for two hundred years I  walked the world of men, to watch and listen and learn. I might be walking still, but my legs were sore  and my heart was weary, so I turned my feet for home.”  “Two hundred years?” said Meera.  The child smiled. “Men, they are the children.”  “Do you have a name?” asked Bran. “When I am needing one.” She waved her torch toward the  black crack in the back wall of the cave. “Our way is down. You must come with me now.”  Bran shivered again. “The ranger …”  “He cannot come.”  “They’ll kill him.”  “No. They killed him long ago. Come now. It is warmer down deep, and no one will hurt you  there. He is waiting for you.”  “The three-eyed crow?” asked Meera. “The greenseer.” And with that she was off, and they had  no choice but to follow. Meera helped Bran back up onto Hodor’s back, though his basket was  half-crushed and wet from melting snow. Then she slipped an arm around her brother and shouldered  him back onto his feet once more. His eyes opened. “What?” he said. “Meera? Where are we?” When  he saw the fire, he smiled. “I had the strangest dream.”  The way was cramped and twisty, and so low that Hodor soon was crouching. Bran hunched  down as best he could, but even so, the top of his head was soon scraping and bumping against the  ceiling. Loose dirt crumbled at each touch and dribbled down into his eyes and hair, and once he  smacked his brow on a thick white root growing from the tunnel wall, with tendrils hanging from it and  spiderwebs between its fingers.  The child went in front with the torch in hand, her cloak of leaves whispering behind her, but  the passage turned so much that Bran soon lost sight of her. Then the only light was what was reflected  off the passage walls. After they had gone down a little, the cave divided, but the left branch was dark as  pitch, so even Hodor knew to follow the moving torch to the right.  The way the shadows shifted made it seem as if the walls were moving too. Bran saw great  white snakes slithering in and out of the earth around him, and his heart thumped in fear. He wondered  if they had blundered into a nest of milk snakes or giant grave worms, soft and pale and squishy. Grave  worms have teeth.  Hodor saw them too. “Hodor,” he whimpered, reluctant to go on. But when the girl child  stopped to let them catch her, the torchlight steadied, and Bran realized that the snakes were only  white roots like the one he’d hit his head on. “It’s weirwood roots,” he said. “Remember the heart tree  in the godswood, Hodor? The white tree with the red leaves? A tree can’t hurt you.”   “Hodor.” Hodor plunged ahead, hurrying after the child and her torch, deeper into the earth.  They passed another branching, and another, then came into an echoing cavern as large as the great hall  of Winterfell, with stone teeth hanging from its ceiling and more poking up through its floor. The child in  the leafy cloak wove a path through them. From time to time she stopped and waved her torch at them  impatiently. This way, it seemed to say, this way, this way, faster.  There were more side passages after that, more chambers, and Bran heard dripping water  somewhere to his right. When he looked off that way, he saw eyes looking back at them, slitted eyes  that glowed bright, reflecting back the torchlight. More children, he told himself, the girl is not the only  one, but Old Nan’s tale of Gendel’s children came back to him as well.  The roots were everywhere, twisting through earth and stone, closing off some passages and  holding up the roofs of others. All the color is gone, Bran realized suddenly. The world was black soil and  white wood. The heart tree at Winterfell had roots as thick around as a giant’s legs, but these were even  thicker. And Bran had never seen so many of them. There must be a whole grove of weirwoods growing  up above us.  The light dwindled again. Small as she was, the child-who-was-not-a-child moved quickly when  she wanted. As Hodor thumped after her, something crunched beneath his feet. His halt was so sudden  that Meera and Jojen almost slammed into his back.  “Bones,” said Bran. “It’s bones.” The floor of the passage was littered with the bones of birds  and beasts. But there were other bones as well, big ones that must have come from giants and small  ones that could have been from children. On either side of them, in niches carved from the stone, skulls  looked down on them. Bran saw a bear skull and a wolf skull, half a dozen human skulls and near as  many giants. All the rest were small, queerly formed. Children of the forest. The roots had grown in and  around and through them, every one. A few had ravens perched atop them, watching them pass with  bright black eyes.  The last part of their dark journey was the steepest. Hodor made the final descent on his arse,  bumping and sliding downward in a clatter of broken bones, loose dirt, and pebbles. The girl child was  waiting for them, standing on one end of a natural bridge above a yawning chasm. Down below in the  darkness, Bran heard the sound of rushing water. An underground river.  “Do we have to cross?” Bran asked, as the Reeds came sliding down behind him. The prospect  frightened him. If Hodor slipped on that narrow bridge, they would fall and fall.  “No, boy,” the child said. “Behind you.” She lifted her torch higher, and the light seemed to shift  and change. One moment the flames burned orange and yellow, filling the cavern with a ruddy glow;  then all the colors faded, leaving only black and white. Behind them Meera gasped. Hodor turned.  Before them a pale lord in ebon finery sat dreaming in a tangled nest of roots, a woven  weirwood throne that embraced his withered limbs as a mother does a child.   His body was so skeletal and his clothes so rotted that at first Bran took him for another corpse,  a dead man propped up so long that the roots had grown over him, under him, and through him. What  skin the corpse lord showed was white, save for a bloody blotch that crept up his neck onto his cheek.  His white hair was fine and thin as root hair and long enough to brush against the earthen floor. Roots  coiled around his legs like wooden serpents. One burrowed through his breeches into the desiccated  flesh of his thigh, to emerge again from his shoulder. A spray of dark red leaves sprouted from his skull,  and grey mushrooms spotted his brow. A little skin remained, stretched across his face, tight and hard as  white leather, but even that was fraying, and here and there the brown and yellow bone beneath was  poking through.  “Are you the three-eyed crow?” Bran heard himself say. A three-eyed crow should have three  eyes. He has only one, and that one red. Bran could feel the eye staring at him, shining like a pool of  blood in the torchlight. Where his other eye should have been, a thin white root grew from an empty  socket, down his cheek, and into his neck.  “A … crow?” The pale lord’s voice was dry. His lips moved slowly, as if they had forgotten how to  form words. “Once, aye. Black of garb and black of blood.” The clothes he wore were rotten and faded,  spotted with moss and eaten through with worms, but once they had been black. “I have been many  things, Bran. Now I am as you see me, and now you will understand why I could not come to you …  except in dreams. I have watched you for a long time, watched you with a thousand eyes and one. I saw  your birth, and that of your lord father before you. I saw your first step, heard your first word, was part  of your first dream. I was watching when you fell. And now you are come to me at last, Brandon Stark,  though the hour is late.”  “I’m here,” Bran said, “only I’m broken. Will you … will you fix me … my legs, I mean?”  “No,” said the pale lord. “That is beyond my powers.”  Bran’s eyes filled with tears. We came such a long way. The chamber echoed to the sound of the  black river.  “You will never walk again, Bran,” the pale lips promised, “but you will fly.”  The moon was a crescent, thin and sharp as the blade of a knife. A pale sun rose and set and  rose again. Red leaves whispered in the wind. Dark clouds filled the skies and turned to storms.  Lightning flashed and thunder rumbled, and dead men with black hands and bright blue eyes shuffled  round a cleft in the hillside but could not enter. Under the hill, the broken boy sat upon a weirwood  throne, listening to whispers in the dark as ravens walked up and down his arms.  “You will never walk again,” the three-eyed crow had promised, “but you will fly.” Sometimes  the sound of song would drift up from someplace far below. The children of the forest, Old Nan would  have called the singers, but those who sing the song of earth was their own name for themselves, in the  True Tongue that no human man could speak. The ravens could speak it, though. Their small black eyes  were full of secrets, and they would caw at him and peck his skin when they heard the songs.  The moon was fat and full. Stars wheeled across a black sky. Rain fell and froze, and tree limbs  snapped from the weight of the ice. Bran and Meera made up names for those who sang the song of  earth: Ash and Leaf and Scales, Black Knife and Snowylocks and Coals. Their true names were too long  for human tongues, said Leaf. Only she could speak the Common Tongue, so what the others thought of  their new names Bran never learned.  After the bone-grinding cold of the lands beyond the Wall, the caves were blessedly warm, and  when the chill crept out of the rock the singers would light fires to drive it off again. Down here there  was no wind, no snow, no ice, no dead things reaching out to grab you, only dreams and rushlight and  the kisses of the ravens. And the whisperer in darkness.  The last greenseer, the singers called him, but in Bran’s dreams he was still a three-eyed crow.  When Meera Reed had asked him his true name, he made a ghastly sound that might have been a  chuckle. “I wore many names when I was quick, but even I once had a mother, and the name she gave  me at her breast was Brynden.”  “I have an uncle Brynden,” Bran said. “He’s my mother’s uncle, really. Brynden Blackfish, he’s  called.”  “Your uncle may have been named for me. Some are, still. Not so many as before. Men forget.  Only the trees remember.” His voice was so soft that Bran had to strain to hear.  “Most of him has gone into the tree,” explained the singer Meera called Leaf. “He has lived  beyond his mortal span, and yet he lingers. For us, for you, for the realms of men. Only a little strength  remains in his flesh. He has a thousand eyes and one, but there is much to watch. One day you will  know.”  “What will I know?” Bran asked the Reeds afterward, when they came with torches burning  brightly in their hand, to carry him back to a small chamber off the big cavern where the singers had  made beds for them to sleep. “What do the trees remember?”   “The secrets of the old gods,” said Jojen Reed. Food and fire and rest had helped restore him  after the ordeals of their journey, but he seemed sadder now, sullen, with a weary, haunted look about  the eyes. “Truths the First Men knew, forgotten now in Winterfell … but not in the wet wild. We live  closer to the green in our bogs and crannogs, and we remember. Earth and water, soil and stone, oaks  and elms and willows, they were here before us all and will still remain when we are gone.”  “So will you,” said Meera. That made Bran sad. What if I don’t want to remain when you are  gone? he almost asked, but he swallowed the words unspoken. He was almost a man grown, and he did  not want Meera to think he was some weepy babe. “Maybe you could be greenseers too,” he said  instead.  “No, Bran.” Now Meera sounded sad. “It is given to a few to drink of that green fountain whilst  still in mortal flesh, to hear the whisperings of the leaves and see as the trees see, as the gods see,” said  Jojen. “Most are not so blessed. The gods gave me only greendreams. My task was to get you here. My  part in this is done.”  The moon was a black hole in the sky. Wolves howled in the wood, sniffing through the  snowdrifts after dead things. A murder of ravens erupted from the hillside, screaming their sharp cries,  black wings beating above a white world. A red sun rose and set and rose again, painting the snows in  shades of rose and pink. Under the hill, Jojen brooded, Meera fretted, and Hodor wandered through  dark tunnels with a sword in his right hand and a torch in his left. Or was it Bran wandering?  No one must ever know.  The great cavern that opened on the abyss was as black as pitch, black as tar, blacker than the  feathers of a crow. Light entered as a trespasser, unwanted and unwelcome, and soon was gone again;  cookfires, candles, and rushes burned for a little while, then guttered out again, their brief lives at an  end.  The singers made Bran a throne of his own, like the one Lord Brynden sat, white weirwood  flecked with red, dead branches woven through living roots. They placed it in the great cavern by the  abyss, where the black air echoed to the sound of running water far below. Of soft grey moss they made  his seat. Once he had been lowered into place, they covered him with warm furs.  There he sat, listening to the hoarse whispers of his teacher. “Never fear the darkness, Bran.”  The lord’s words were accompanied by a faint rustling of wood and leaf, a slight twisting of his head.  “The strongest trees are rooted in the dark places of the earth. Darkness will be your cloak, your shield,  your mother’s milk. Darkness will make you strong.”  The moon was a crescent, thin and sharp as the blade of a knife. Snowflakes drifted down  soundlessly to cloak the soldier pines and sentinels in white. The drifts grew so deep that they covered  the entrance to the caves, leaving a white wall that Summer had to dig through whenever he went  outside to join his pack and hunt. Bran did not oft range with them in those days, but some nights he  watched them from above.   Flying was even better than climbing.  Slipping into Summer’s skin had become as easy for him as slipping on a pair of breeches once  had been, before his back was broken. Changing his own skin for a raven’s night-black feathers had been  harder, but not as hard as he had feared, not with these ravens. “A wild stallion will buck and kick when  a man tries to mount him, and try to bite the hand that slips the bit between his teeth,” Lord Brynden  said, “but a horse that has known one rider will accept another. Young or old, these birds have all been  ridden. Choose one now, and fly.”  He chose one bird, and then another, without success, but the third raven looked at him with  shrewd black eyes, tilted its head, and gave a quork, and quick as that he was not a boy looking at a  raven but a raven looking at a boy. The song of the river suddenly grew louder, the torches burned a  little brighter than before, and the air was full of strange smells. When he tried to speak it came out in a  scream, and his first flight ended when he crashed into a wall and ended back inside his own broken  body. The raven was unhurt. It flew to him and landed on his arm, and Bran stroked its feathers and  slipped inside of it again. Before long he was flying around the cavern, weaving through the long stone  teeth that hung down from the ceiling, even flapping out over the abyss and swooping down into its  cold black depths.  Then he realized he was not alone. “Someone else was in the raven,” he told Lord Brynden, once  he had returned to his own skin. “Some girl. I felt her.”  “A woman, of those who sing the song of earth,” his teacher said. “Long dead, yet a part of her  remains, just as a part of you would remain in Summer if your boy’s flesh were to die upon the morrow.  A shadow on the soul. She will not harm you.”  “Do all the birds have singers in them?”  “All,” Lord Brynden said. “It was the singers who taught the First Men to send messages by  raven … but in those days, the birds would speak the words. The trees remember, but men forget, and  so now they write the messages on parchment and tie them round the feet of birds who have never  shared their skin.”  Old Nan had told him the same story once, Bran remembered, but when he asked Robb if it was  true, his brother laughed and asked him if he believed in grumkins too. He wished Robb were with them  now. I’d tell him I could fly, but he wouldn’t believe, so I’d have to show him. I bet that he could learn to  fly too, him and Arya and Sansa, even baby Rickon and Jon Snow. We could all be ravens and live in  Maester Luwin’s rookery.  That was just another silly dream, though. Some days Bran wondered if all of this wasn’t just  some dream. Maybe he had fallen asleep out in the snows and dreamed himself a safe, warm place. You  have to wake, he would tell himself, you have to wake right now, or you’ll go dreaming into death. Once  or twice he pinched his arm with his fingers, really hard, but the only thing that did was make his arm  hurt. In the beginning he had tried to count the days by making note of when he woke and slept, but   down here sleeping and waking had a way of melting into one another. Dreams became lessons, lessons  became dreams, things happened all at once or not at all. Had he done that or only dreamed it?  “Only one man in a thousand is born a skinchanger,” Lord Brynden said one day, after Bran had  learned to fly, “and only one skinchanger in a thousand can be a greenseer.”  “I thought the greenseers were the wizards of the children,” Bran said. “The singers, I mean.”  “In a sense. Those you call the children of the forest have eyes as golden as the sun, but once in  a great while one is born amongst them with eyes as red as blood, or green as the moss on a tree in the  heart of the forest. By these signs do the gods mark those they have chosen to receive the gift. The  chosen ones are not robust, and their quick years upon the earth are few, for every song must have its  balance. But once inside the wood they linger long indeed. A thousand eyes, a hundred skins, wisdom  deep as the roots of ancient trees. Greenseers.”  Bran did not understand, so he asked the Reeds. “Do you like to read books, Bran?” Jojen asked  him.  “Some books. I like the fighting stories. My sister Sansa likes the kissing stories, but those are  stupid.”  “A reader lives a thousand lives before he dies,” said Jojen. “The man who never reads lives only  one. The singers of the forest had no books. No ink, no parchment, no written language. Instead they  had the trees, and the weirwoods above all. When they died, they went into the wood, into leaf and  limb and root, and the trees remembered. All their songs and spells, their histories and prayers,  everything they knew about this world. Maesters will tell you that the weirwoods are sacred to the old  gods. The singers believe they are the old gods. When singers die they become part of that godhood.”  Bran’s eyes widened. “They’re going to kill me?”  “No,” Meera said. “Jojen, you’re scaring him.”  “He is not the one who needs to be afraid.”  The moon was fat and full. Summer prowled through the silent woods, a long grey shadow that  grew more gaunt with every hunt, for living game could not be found. The ward upon the cave mouth  still held; the dead men could not enter. The snows had buried most of them again, but they were still  there, hidden, frozen, waiting. Other dead things came to join them, things that had once been men and  women, even children. Dead ravens sat on bare brown branches, wings crusted with ice. A snow bear  crashed through the brush, huge and skeletal, half its head sloughed away to reveal the skull beneath.  Summer and his pack fell upon it and tore it into pieces. Afterward they gorged, though the meat was  rotted and half-frozen, and moved even as they ate it.  Under the hill they still had food to eat. A hundred kinds of mushrooms grew down here. Blind  white fish swam in the black river, but they tasted just as good as fish with eyes once you cooked them   up. They had cheese and milk from the goats that shared the caves with the singers, even some oats and  barleycorn and dried fruit laid by during the long summer. And almost every day they ate blood stew,  thickened with barley and onions and chunks of meat. Jojen thought it might be squirrel meat, and  Meera said that it was rat. Bran did not care. It was meat and it was good. The stewing made it tender.  The caves were timeless, vast, silent. They were home to more than three score living singers  and the bones of thousands dead, and extended far below the hollow hill. “Men should not go  wandering in this place,” Leaf warned them. “The river you hear is swift and black, and flows down and  down to a sunless sea. And there are passages that go even deeper, bottomless pits and sudden shafts,  forgotten ways that lead to the very center of the earth. Even my people have not explored them all,  and we have lived here for a thousand thousand of your man-years.”  Though the men of the Seven Kingdoms might call them the children of the forest, Leaf and her  people were far from childlike. Little wise men of the forest would have been closer. They were small  compared to men, as a wolf is smaller than a direwolf. That does not mean it is a pup. They had  nut-brown skin, dappled like a deer’s with paler spots, and large ears that could hear things that no man  could hear. Their eyes were big too, great golden cat’s eyes that could see down passages where a boy’s  eyes saw only blackness. Their hands had only three fingers and a thumb, with sharp black claws instead  of nails.  And they did sing. They sang in True Tongue, so Bran could not understand the words, but their  voices were as pure as winter air. “Where are the rest of you?” Bran asked Leaf, once.  “Gone down into the earth,” she answered. “Into the stones, into the trees. Before the First  Men came all this land that you call Westeros was home to us, yet even in those days we were few. The  gods gave us long lives but not great numbers, lest we overrun the world as deer will overrun a wood  where there are no wolves to hunt them. That was in the dawn of days, when our sun was rising. Now it  sinks, and this is our long dwindling. The giants are almost gone as well, they who were our bane and  our brothers. The great lions of the western hills have been slain, the unicorns are all but gone, the  mammoths down to a few hundred. The direwolves will outlast us all, but their time will come as well. In  the world that men have made, there is no room for them, or us.”  She seemed sad when she said it, and that made Bran sad as well. It was only later that he  thought, Men would not be sad. Men would be wroth. Men would hate and swear a bloody vengeance.  The singers sing sad songs, where men would fight and kill.  One day Meera and Jojen decided to go see the river, despite Leaf’s cautions. “I want to come  too,” Bran said.  Meera gave him a mournful look. The river was six hundred feet below, down steep slopes and  twisty passages, she explained, and the last part required climbing down a rope. “Hodor could never  make the climb with you on his back. I’m sorry, Bran.”   Bran remembered a time when no one could climb as good as him, not even Robb or Jon. Part of  him wanted to shout at them for leaving him, and another part wanted to cry. He was almost a man  grown, though, so he said nothing. But after they were gone, he slipped inside Hodor’s skin and followed  them.  The big stableboy no longer fought him as he had the first time, back in the lake tower during  the storm. Like a dog who has had all the fight whipped out of him, Hodor would curl up and hide  whenever Bran reached out for him. His hiding place was somewhere deep within him, a pit where not  even Bran could touch him. No one wants to hurt you, Hodor, he said silently, to the child-man whose  flesh he’d taken. I just want to be strong again for a while. I’ll give it back, the way I always do.  No one ever knew when he was wearing Hodor’s skin. Bran only had to smile, do as he was told,  and mutter “Hodor” from time to time, and he could follow Meera and Jojen, grinning happily, without  anyone suspecting it was really him. He often tagged along, whether he was wanted or not. In the end,  the Reeds were glad he came. Jojen made it down the rope easily enough, but after Meera caught a  blind white fish with her frog spear and it was time to climb back up, his arms began to tremble and he  could not make it to the top, so they had to tie the rope around him and let Hodor haul him up.  “Hodor,” he grunted every time he gave a pull. “Hodor, hodor, hodor.”  The moon was a crescent, thin and sharp as the blade of a knife. Summer dug up a severed arm,  black and covered with hoarfrost, its fingers opening and closing as it pulled itself across the frozen  snow. There was still enough meat on it to fill his empty belly, and after that was done he cracked the  arm bones for the marrow. Only then did the arm remember it was dead.  Bran ate with Summer and his pack, as a wolf. As a raven he flew with the murder, circling the  hill at sunset, watching for foes, feeling the icy touch of the air. As Hodor he explored the caves. He  found chambers full of bones, shafts that plunged deep into the earth, a place where the skeletons of  gigantic bats hung upside down from the ceiling. He even crossed the slender stone bridge that arched  over the abyss and discovered more passages and chambers on the far side. One was full of singers,  enthroned like Brynden in nests of weirwood roots that wove under and through and around their  bodies. Most of them looked dead to him, but as he crossed in front of them their eyes would open and  follow the light of his torch, and one of them opened and closed a wrinkled mouth as if he were trying to  speak. “Hodor,” Bran said to him, and he felt the real Hodor stir down in his pit.  Seated on his throne of roots in the great cavern, half-corpse and half-tree, Lord Brynden  seemed less a man than some ghastly statue made of twisted wood, old bone, and rotted wool. The only  thing that looked alive in the pale ruin that was his face was his one red eye, burning like the last coal in  a dead fire, surrounded by twisted roots and tatters of leathery white skin hanging off a yellowed skull.  The sight of him still frightened Bran—the weirwood roots snaking in and out of his withered  flesh, the mushrooms sprouting from his cheeks, the white wooden worm that grew from the socket  where one eye had been. He liked it better when the torches were put out. In the dark he could pretend  that it was the three-eyed crow who whispered to him and not some grisly talking corpse.   One day I will be like him. The thought filled Bran with dread. Bad enough that he was broken,  with his useless legs. Was he doomed to lose the rest too, to spend all of his years with a weirwood  growing in him and through him? Lord Brynden drew his life from the tree, Leaf told them. He did not  eat, he did not drink. He slept, he dreamed, he watched. I was going to be a knight, Bran remembered. I  used to run and climb and fight. It seemed a thousand years ago.  What was he now? Only Bran the broken boy, Brandon of House Stark, prince of a lost kingdom,  lord of a burned castle, heir to ruins. He had thought the three-eyed crow would be a sorcerer, a wise  old wizard who could fix his legs, but that was some stupid child’s dream, he realized now. I am too old  for such fancies, he told himself. A thousand eyes, a hundred skins, wisdom deep as the roots of ancient  trees. That was as good as being a knight. Almost as good, anyway.  The moon was a black hole in the sky. Outside the cave the world went on. Outside the cave the  sun rose and set, the moon turned, the cold winds howled. Under the hill, Jojen Reed grew ever more  sullen and solitary, to his sister’s distress. She would often sit with Bran beside their little fire, talking of  everything and nothing, petting Summer where he slept between them, whilst her brother wandered  the caverns by himself. Jojen had even taken to climbing up to the cave’s mouth when the day was  bright. He would stand there for hours, looking out over the forest, wrapped in furs yet shivering all the  same.  “He wants to go home,” Meera told Bran. “He will not even try and fight his fate. He says the  greendreams do not lie.”  “He’s being brave,” said Bran. The only time a man can be brave is when he is afraid, his father  had told him once, long ago, on the day they found the direwolf pups in the summer snows. He still  remembered.  “He’s being stupid,” Meera said. “I’d hoped that when we found your three-eyed crow … now I  wonder why we ever came.”  For me, Bran thought. “His greendreams,” he said. “His greendreams.” Meera’s voice was bitter.  “Hodor,” said Hodor.  Meera began to cry.  Bran hated being crippled then. “Don’t cry,” he said. He wanted to put his arms around her, hold  her tight the way his mother used to hold him back at Winterfell when he’d hurt himself. She was right  there, only a few feet from him, but so far out of reach it might have been a hundred leagues. To touch  her he would need to pull himself along the ground with his hands, dragging his legs behind him. The  floor was rough and uneven, and it would be slow going, full of scrapes and bumps. I could put on  Hodor’s skin, he thought. Hodor could hold her and pat her on the back. The thought made Bran feel  strange, but he was still thinking it when Meera bolted from the fire, back out into the darkness of the  tunnels. He heard her steps recede until there was nothing but the voices of the singers.   The moon was a crescent, thin and sharp as the blade of a knife. The days marched past, one  after the other, each shorter than the one before. The nights grew longer. No sunlight ever reached the  caves beneath the hill. No moonlight ever touched those stony halls. Even the stars were strangers  there. Those things belonged to the world above, where time ran in its iron circles, day to night to day to  night to day.  “It is time,” Lord Brynden said.  Something in his voice sent icy fingers running up Bran’s back. “Time for what?”  “For the next step. For you to go beyond skinchanging and learn what it means to be a  greenseer.”  “The trees will teach him,” said Leaf. She beckoned, and another of the singers padded forward,  the white-haired one that Meera had named Snowy locks. She had a weirwood bowl in her hands,  carved with a dozen faces, like the ones the heart trees wore. Inside was a white paste, thick and heavy,  with dark red veins running through it. “You must eat of this,” said Leaf. She handed Bran a wooden  spoon.  The boy looked at the bowl uncertainly. “What is it?”  “A paste of weirwood seeds.”  Something about the look of it made Bran feel ill. The red veins were only weirwood sap, he  supposed, but in the torchlight they looked remarkably like blood. He dipped the spoon into the paste,  then hesitated. “Will this make me a greenseer?”  “Your blood makes you a greenseer,” said Lord Brynden. “This will help awaken your gifts and  wed you to the trees.”  Bran did want to be married to a tree … but who else would wed a broken boy like him? A  thousand eyes, a hundred skins, wisdom deep as the roots of ancient trees. A greenseer.  He ate.  It had a bitter taste, though not so bitter as acorn paste. The first spoonful was the hardest to  get down. He almost retched it right back up. The second tasted better. The third was almost sweet. The  rest he spooned up eagerly. Why had he thought that it was bitter? It tasted of honey, of new-fallen  snow, of pepper and cinnamon and the last kiss his mother ever gave him. The empty bowl slipped from  his fingers and clattered on the cavern floor. “I don’t feel any different. What happens next?”  Leaf touched his hand. “The trees will teach you. The trees remember.” He raised a hand, and  the other singers began to move about the cavern, extinguishing the torches one by one. The darkness  thickened and crept toward them.   “Close your eyes,” said the three-eyed crow. “Slip your skin, as you do when you join with  Summer. But this time, go into the roots instead. Follow them up through the earth, to the trees upon  the hill, and tell me what you see.”  Bran closed his eyes and slipped free of his skin. Into the roots, he thought. Into the weirwood.  Become the tree. For an instant he could see the cavern in its black mantle, could hear the river rushing  by below.  Then all at once he was back home again.  Lord Eddard Stark sat upon a rock beside the deep black pool in the gods wood, the pale roots of  the heart tree twisting around him like an old man’s gnarled arms. The greatsword Ice lay across Lord  Eddard’s lap, and he was cleaning the blade with an oilcloth.  “Winterfell,” Bran whispered.  His father looked up. “Who’s there?” he asked, turning … … and Bran, frightened, pulled away.  His father and the black pool and the godswood faded and were gone and he was back in the cavern,  the pale thick roots of his weirwood throne cradling his limbs as a mother does a child. A torch flared to  life before him.  “Tell us what you saw.” From far away Leaf looked almost a girl, no older than Bran or one of his  sisters, but close at hand she seemed far older. She claimed to have seen two hundred years.  Bran’s throat was very dry. He swallowed. “Winterfell. I was back in Winterfell. I saw my father.  He’s not dead, he’s not, I saw him, he’s back at Winterfell, he’s still alive.”  “No,” said Leaf. “He is gone, boy. Do not seek to call him back from death.”  “I saw him.” Bran could feel rough wood pressing against one cheek. “He was cleaning Ice.”  “You saw what you wished to see. Your heart yearns for your father and your home, so that is  what you saw.”  “A man must know how to look before he can hope to see,” said Lord Brynden. “Those were  shadows of days past that you saw, Bran. You were looking through the eyes of the heart tree in your  godswood. Time is different for a tree than for a man. Sun and soil and water, these are the things a  weirwood understands, not days and years and centuries. For men, time is a river. We are trapped in its  flow, hurtling from past to present, always in the same direction. The lives of trees are different. They  root and grow and die in one place, and that river does not move them. The oak is the acorn, the acorn  is the oak. And the weirwood … a thousand human years are a moment to a weirwood, and through  such gates you and I may gaze into the past.”  “But,” said Bran, “he heard me.”   “He heard a whisper on the wind, a rustling amongst the leaves. You cannot speak to him, try as  you might. I know. I have my own ghosts, Bran. A brother that I loved, a brother that I hated, a woman I  desired. Through the trees, I see them still, but no word of mine has ever reached them. The past  remains the past. We can learn from it, but we cannot change it.”  “Will I see my father again?”  “Once you have mastered your gifts, you may look where you will and see what the trees have  seen, be it yesterday or last year or a thousand ages past. Men live their lives trapped in an eternal  present, between the mists of memory and the sea of shadow that is all we know of the days to come.  Certain moths live their whole lives in a day, yet to them that little span of time must seem as long as  years and decades do to us. An oak may live three hundred years, a redwood tree three thousand. A  weirwood will live forever if left undisturbed. To them seasons pass in the flutter of a moth’s wing, and  past, present, and future are one. Nor will your sight be limited to your godswood. The singers carved  eyes into their heart trees to awaken them, and those are the first eyes a new greenseer learns to use …  but in time you will see well beyond the trees themselves.”  “When?” Bran wanted to know. “In a year, or three, or ten. That I have not glimpsed. It will  come in time, I promise you. But I am tired now, and the trees are calling me. We will resume on the  morrow.”  Hodor carried Bran back to his chamber, muttering “Hodor” in a low voice as Leaf went before  them with a torch. He had hoped that Meera and Jojen would be there, so he could tell them what he  had seen, but their snug alcove in the rock was cold and empty. Hodor eased Bran down onto his bed,  covered him with furs, and made a fire for them. A thousand eyes, a hundred skins, wisdom deep as the  roots of ancient trees.  Watching the flames, Bran decided he would stay awake till Meera came back. Jojen would be  unhappy, he knew, but Meera would be glad for him, He did not remember closing his eyes.  … but then somehow he was back at Winterfell again, in the gods-wood looking down upon his  father. Lord Eddard seemed much younger this time. His hair was brown, with no hint of grey in it, his  head bowed. “… let them grow up close as brothers, with only love between them,” he prayed, “and let  my lady wife find it in her heart to forgive …”  “Father.” Bran’s voice was a whisper in the wind, a rustle in the leaves. “Father, it’s me. It’s  Bran. Brandon.”  Eddard Stark lifted his head and looked long at the weirwood, frowning, but he did not speak.  He cannot see me, Bran realized, despairing. He wanted to reach out and touch him, but all that he could  do was watch and listen. I am in the tree. I am inside the heart tree, looking out of its red eyes, but the  weirwood cannot talk, so I can’t.  Eddard Stark resumed his prayer. Bran felt his eyes fill up with tears. But were they his own  tears, or the weirwood’s? If I cry, will the tree begin to weep?   The rest of his father’s words were drowned out by a sudden clatter of wood on wood. Eddard  Stark dissolved, like mist in a morning sun. Now two children danced across the godswood, hooting at  one another as they dueled with broken branches. The girl was the older and taller of the two. Arya!  Bran thought eagerly, as he watched her leap up onto a rock and cut at the boy. But that couldn’t be  right. If the girl was Arya, the boy was Bran himself, and he had never worn his hair so long. And Arya  never beat me playing swords, the way that girl is beating him. She slashed the boy across his thigh, so  hard that his leg went out from under him and he fell into the pool and began to splash and shout. “You  be quiet, stupid,” the girl said, tossing her own branch aside. “It’s just water. Do you want Old Nan to  hear and run tell Father?” She knelt and pulled her brother from the pool, but before she got him out  again, the two of them were gone.  After that the glimpses came faster and faster, till Bran was feeling lost and dizzy. He saw no  more of his father, nor the girl who looked like Arya, but a woman heavy with child emerged naked and  dripping from the black pool, knelt before the tree, and begged the old gods for a son who would  avenge her. Then there came a brown-haired girl slender as a spear who stood on the tips of her toes to  kiss the lips of a young knight as tall as Hodor. A dark-eyed youth, pale and fierce, sliced three branches  off the weirwood and shaped them into arrows. The tree itself was shrinking, growing smaller with each  vision, whilst the lesser trees dwindled into saplings and vanished, only to be replaced by other trees  that would dwindle and vanish in their turn. And now the lords Bran glimpsed were tall and hard, stern  men in fur and chain mail. Some wore faces he remembered from the statues in the crypts, but they  were gone before he could put a name to them.  Then, as he watched, a bearded man forced a captive down onto his knees before the heart  tree. A white-haired woman stepped toward them through a drift of dark red leaves, a bronze sickle in  her hand.  “No,” said Bran, “no, don’t,” but they could not hear him, no more than his father had. The  woman grabbed the captive by the hair, hooked the sickle round his throat, and slashed. And through  the mist of centuries the broken boy could only watch as the man’s feet drummed against the earth …  but as his life flowed out of him in a red tide, Brandon Stark could taste the blood. 