 He drank his way across the narrow sea.  The ship was small, his cabin smaller, but the captain would not allow him abovedecks. The  rocking of the deck beneath his feet made his stomach heave, and the wretched food tasted even worse  when retched back up. But why did he need salt beef, hard cheese, and bread crawling with worms  when he had wine to nourish him? It was red and sour, very strong. Sometimes he heaved the wine up  too, but there was always more.  “The world is full of wine,” he muttered in the dankness of his cabin. His father never had any  use for drunkards, but what did that matter? His father was dead. He’d killed him. A bolt in the belly, my  lord, and all for you. If only I was better with a crossbow, I would have put it through that cock you made  me with, you bloody bastard.  Belowdecks, there was neither night nor day. Tyrion marked time by the comings and goings of  the cabin boy who brought the meals he did not eat. The boy always brought a brush and bucket too, to  clean up. “Is this Dornish wine?” Tyrion asked him once, as he pulled a stopper from a skin. “It reminds  me of a certain snake I knew. A droll fellow, till a mountain fell on him.”  The cabin boy did not answer. He was an ugly boy, though admittedly more comely than a  certain dwarf with half a nose and a scar from eye to chin. “Have I offended you?” Tyrion asked, as the  boy was scrubbing. “Were you commanded not to talk to me? Or did some dwarf diddle your mother?”  That went unanswered too. “Where are we sailing? Tell me that.” Jaime had made mention of the Free  Cities, but had never said which one. “Is it Braavos? Tyrosh? Myr?” Tyrion would sooner have gone to  Dorne. Myrcella is older than Tommen, by Dornish law the Iron Throne is hers. I will help her claim her  rights, as Prince Oberyn suggested.  Oberyn was dead, though, his head smashed to bloody ruin by the armored fist of Ser Gregor  Clegane. And without the Red Viper to urge him on, would Doran Martell even consider such a chancy  scheme? He might clap me in chains instead and hand me back to my sweet sister. The Wall might be  safer. Old Bear Mormont said the Night’s Watch had need of men like Tyrion. Mormont might be dead,  though. By now Slynt may be the lord commander. That butcher’s son was not like to have forgotten   who sent him to the Wall. Do I really want to spend the rest of my life eating salt beef and porridge with  murderers and thieves? Not that the rest of his life would last very long. Janos Slynt would see to that.  The cabin boy wet his brush and scrubbed on manfully. “Have you ever visited the pleasure  houses of Lys?” the dwarf inquired. “Might that be where whores go?” Tyrion could not seem to recall  the Valyrian word for whore, and in any case it was too late. The boy tossed his brush back in his bucket  and took his leave.  The wine has blurred my wits. He had learned to read High Valyrian at his maester’s knee,  though what they spoke in the Nine Free Cities … well, it was not so much a dialect as nine dialects on  the way to becoming separate tongues. Tyrion had some Braavosi and a smattering of Myrish. In Tyrosh  he should be able to curse the gods, call a man a cheat, and order up an ale, thanks to a sellsword he  had once known at the Rock. At least in Dorne they speak the Common Tongue. Like Dornish food and  Dornish law, Dornish speech was spiced with the flavors of the Rhoyne, but a man could comprehend it.  Dorne, yes, Dorne for me. He crawled into his bunk, clutching that thought like a child with a doll.  Sleep had never come easily to Tyrion Lannister. Aboard that ship it seldom came at all, though  from time to time he managed to drink sufficient wine to pass out for a while. At least he did not dream.  He had dreamed enough for one small life. And of such follies: love, justice, friendship, glory. As well  dream of being tall. It was all beyond his reach, Tyrion knew now. But he did not know where whores  go.  “Wherever whores go,” his father had said. His last words, and what words they were. The  crossbow thrummed, Lord Tywin sat back down, and Tyrion Lannister found himself waddling through  the darkness with Varys at his side. He must have clambered back down the shaft, two hundred and  thirty rungs to where orange embers glowed in the mouth of an iron dragon. He remembered none of it.  Only the sound the crossbow made, and the stink of his father’s bowels opening. Even in his dying, he  found a way to shit on me.  Varys had escorted him through the tunnels, but they never spoke until they emerged beside  the Blackwater, where Tyrion had won a famous victory and lost a nose. That was when the dwarf  turned to the eunuch and said, “I’ve killed my father,” in the same tone a man might use to say, “I’ve  stubbed my toe.”  The master of whisperers had been dressed as a begging brother, in a moth-eaten robe of  brown roughspun with a cowl that shadowed his smooth fat cheeks and bald round head. “You should  not have climbed that ladder,” he said reproachfully.  “Wherever whores go.” Tyrion had warned his father not to say that word. If I had not loosed, he  would have seen my threats were empty. He would have taken the crossbow from my hands, as once he  took Tysha from my arms. He was rising when I killed him.  “I killed Shae too,” he confessed to Varys.  “You knew what she was.”   “I did. But I never knew what he was.”  Varys tittered. “And now you do.”  I should have killed the eunuch as well. A little more blood on his hands, what would it matter?  He could not say what had stayed his dagger. Not gratitude. Varys had saved him from a headsman’s  sword, but only because Jaime had compelled him. Jaime … no, better not to think of Jaime.  He found a fresh skin of wine instead and sucked at it as if it were a woman’s breast. The sour  red ran down his chin and soaked through his soiled tunic, the same one he had been wearing in his cell.  The deck was swaying beneath his feet, and when he tried to rise it lifted sideways and smashed him  hard against a bulkhead. A storm, he realized, or else I am even drunker than I knew. He retched the  wine up and lay in it a while, wondering if the ship would sink. Is this your vengeance, Father? Has the  Father Above made you his Hand? “Such are the wages of the kinslayer,” he said as the wind howled  outside. It did not seem fair to drown the cabin boy and the captain and all the rest for something he  had done, but when had the gods ever been fair? And around about then, the darkness gulped him  down.  When he stirred again, his head felt like to burst and the ship was spinning round in dizzy circles,  though the captain was insisting that they’d come to port. Tyrion told him to be quiet and kicked feebly  as a huge bald sailor tucked him under one arm and carried him squirming to the hold, where an empty  wine cask awaited him. It was a squat little cask, and a tight fit even for a dwarf. Tyrion pissed himself in  his struggles, for all the good it did. He was crammed face-first into the cask with his knees pushed up  against his ears. The stub of his nose itched horribly, but his arms were pinned so tightly that he could  not reach to scratch it. A palanquin fit for a man of my stature, he thought as they hammered shut the  lid. He could hear voices shouting as he was hoisted up. Every bounce cracked his head against the  bottom of the cask. The world went round and round as the cask rolled downward, then stopped with a  crash that made him want to scream. Another cask slammed into his, and Tyrion bit his tongue.  That was the longest journey he had ever taken, though it could not have lasted more than half  an hour. He was lifted and lowered, rolled and stacked, upended and righted and rolled again. Through  the wooden staves he heard men shouting, and once a horse whickered nearby. His stunted legs began  to cramp, and soon hurt so badly that he forgot the hammering in his head.  It ended as it had begun, with another roll that left him dizzy and more jouncing. Outside,  strange voices were speaking in a tongue he did not know. Someone started pounding on the top of the  cask and the lid cracked open suddenly. Light came flooding in, and cool air as well. Tyrion gasped  greedily and tried to stand, but only managed to knock the cask over sideways and spill himself out onto  a hard-packed earthen floor.  Above him loomed a grotesque fat man with a forked yellow beard, holding a wooden mallet  and an iron chisel. His bedrobe was large enough to serve as a tourney pavilion, but its loosely knotted  belt had come undone, exposing a huge white belly and a pair of heavy breasts that sagged like sacks of   suet covered with coarse yellow hair. He reminded Tyrion of a dead sea cow that had once washed up in  the caverns under Casterly Rock.  The fat man looked down and smiled. “A drunken dwarf,” he said, in the Common Tongue of  Westeros.  “A rotting sea cow.” Tyrion’s mouth was full of blood. He spat it at the fat man’s feet. They were  in a long, dim cellar with barrel-vaulted ceilings, its stone walls spotted with nitre. Casks of wine and ale  surrounded them, more than enough drink to see a thirsty dwarf safely through the night. Or through a  life.  “You are insolent. I like that in a dwarf.” When the fat man laughed, his flesh bounced so  vigorously that Tyrion was afraid he might fall and crush him. “Are you hungry, my little friend? Weary?”  “Thirsty.” Tyrion struggled to his knees. “And filthy.”  The fat man sniffed. “A bath first, just so. Then food and a soft bed, yes? My servants shall see  to it.” His host put the mallet and chisel aside. “My house is yours. Any friend of my friend across the  water is a friend to Illyrio Mopatis, yes.”  And any friend of Varys the Spider is someone I will trust just as far as I can throw him.  The fat man made good on the promised bath, though. No sooner did Tyrion lower himself into  the hot water and close his eyes than he was fast asleep. He woke naked on a goose-down feather bed  so soft it felt as if he had been swallowed by a cloud. His tongue was growing hair and his throat was  raw, but his cock was as hard as an iron bar. He rolled from the bed, found a chamber pot, and  commenced to filling it, with a groan of pleasure.  The room was dim, but there were bars of yellow sunlight showing between the slats of the  shutters. Tyrion shook the last drops off and waddled over patterned Myrish carpets as soft as new  spring grass. Awkwardly he climbed the window seat and flung the shutters open to see where Varys  and the gods had sent him.  Beneath his window six cherry trees stood sentinel around a marble pool, their slender branches  bare and brown. A naked boy stood on the water, poised to duel with a bravo’s blade in hand. He was  lithe and handsome, no older than sixteen, with straight blond hair that brushed his shoulders. So  lifelike did he seem that it took the dwarf a long moment to realize he was made of painted marble,  though his sword shimmered like true steel.  Across the pool stood a brick wall twelve feet high, with iron spikes along its top. Beyond that  was the city. A sea of tiled rooftops crowded close around a bay. He saw square brick towers, a great red  temple, a distant manse upon a hill. In the far distance, sunlight shimmered off deep water. Fishing  boats were moving across the bay, their sails rippling in the wind, and he could see the masts of larger  ships poking up along the shore. Surely one is bound for Dorne, or for Eastwatch-by-the-Sea. He had no   means to pay for passage, though, nor was he made to pull an oar. I suppose I could sign on as a cabin  boy and earn my way by letting the crew bugger me up and down the narrow sea.  He wondered where he was. Even the air smells different here. Strange spices scented the chilly  autumn wind, and he could hear faint cries drifting over the wall from the streets beyond. It sounded  something like Valyrian, but he did not recognize more than one word in five. Not Braavos, he  concluded, nor Tyrosh. Those bare branches and the chill in the air argued against Lys and Myr and  Volantis as well.  When he heard the door opening behind him, Tyrion turned to confront his fat host. “This is  Pentos, yes?”  “Just so. Where else?”  Pentos. Well, it was not King’s Landing, that much could be said for it. “Where do whores go?”  he heard himself ask.  “Whores are found in brothels here, as in Westeros. You will have no need of such, my little  friend. Choose from amongst my servingwomen. None will dare refuse you.”  “Slaves?” the dwarf asked pointedly.  The fat man stroked one of the prongs of his oiled yellow beard, a gesture Tyrion found  remarkably obscene. “Slavery is forbidden in Pentos, by the terms of the treaty the Braavosi imposed on  us a hundred years ago. Still, they will not refuse you.” Illyrio gave a ponderous half bow. “But now my  little friend must excuse me. I have the honor to be a magister of this great city, and the prince has  summoned us to session.” He smiled, showing a mouth full of crooked yellow teeth. “Explore the manse  and grounds as you like, but on no account stray beyond the walls. It is best that no man knows that you  were here.”  “Were? Have I gone somewhere?”  “Time enough to speak of that this evening. My little friend and I shall eat and drink and make  great plans, yes?”  “Yes, my fat friend,” Tyrion replied. He thinks to use me for his profit. It was all profit with the  merchant princes of the Free Cities. “Spice soldiers and cheese lords,” his lord father called them, with  contempt. Should a day ever dawn when Illyrio Mopatis saw more profit in a dead dwarf than a live one,  Tyrion would find himself packed into another wine cask by dusk. It would be well if I was gone before  that day arrives. That it would arrive he did not doubt; Cersei was not like to forget him, and even Jaime  might be vexed to find a quarrel in Father’s belly.  A light wind was riffling the waters of the pool below, all around the naked swordsman. It  reminded him of how Tysha would riffle his hair during the false spring of their marriage, before he  helped his father’s guardsmen rape her. He had been thinking of those guardsmen during his flight,   trying to recall how many there had been. You would think he might remember that, but no. A dozen? A  score? A hundred? He could not say. They had all been grown men, tall and strong … though all men  were tall to a dwarf of thirteen years. Tysha knew their number. Each of them had given her a silver stag,  so she would only need to count the coins. A silver for each and a gold for me. His father had insisted  that he pay her too. A Lannister always pays his debts.  “Wherever whores go,” he heard Lord Tywin say once more, and once more the bowstring  thrummed.  The magister had invited him to explore the manse. He found clean clothes in a cedar chest  inlaid with lapis and mother-of-pearl. The clothes had been made for a small boy, he realized as he  struggled into them. The fabrics were rich enough, if a little musty, but the cut was too long in the legs  and too short in the arms, with a collar that would have turned his face as black as Joffrey’s had he  somehow contrived to get it fastened. Moths had been at them too. At least they do not stink of vomit.  Tyrion began his explorations with the kitchen, where two fat women and a potboy watched  him warily as he helped himself to cheese, bread, and figs. “Good morrow to you, fair ladies,” he said  with a bow. “Do you know where whores go?” When they did not respond, he repeated the question in  High Valyrian, though he had to say courtesan in place of whore. The younger, fatter cook gave him a  shrug that time.  He wondered what they would do if he took them by the hand and dragged them to his  bedchamber. None will dare refuse you, Illyrio claimed, but somehow Tyrion did not think he meant  these two. The younger woman was old enough to be his mother, and the older was likely her mother.  Both were near as fat as Illyrio, with teats that were larger than his head. I could smother myself in flesh.  There were worse ways to die. The way his lord father had died, for one. I should have made him shit a  little gold before expiring. Lord Tywin might have been niggardly with his approval and affection, but he  had always been open-handed when it came to coin. The only thing more pitiful than a dwarf without a  nose is a dwarf without a nose who has no gold.  Tyrion left the fat women to their loaves and kettles and went in search of the cellar where  Illyrio had decanted him the night before. It was not hard to find. There was enough wine there to keep  him drunk for a hundred years; sweet reds from the Reach and sour reds from Dorne, pale Pentoshi  ambers, the green nectar of Myr, three score casks of Arbor gold, even wines from the fabled east, from  Qarth and Yi Ti and Asshai by the Shadow. In the end, Tyrion chose a cask of strongwine marked as the  private stock of Lord Runceford Redwyne, the grandfather of the present Lord of the Arbor. The taste of  it was languorous and heady on the tongue, the color a purple so dark that it looked almost black in the  dim-lit cellar. Tyrion filled a cup, and a flagon for good measure, and carried them up to the gardens to  drink beneath those cherry trees he’d seen.  As it happened, he left by the wrong door and never found the pool he had spied from his  window, but it made no matter. The gardens behind the manse were just as pleasant, and far more  extensive. He wandered through them for a time, drinking. The walls would have shamed any proper  castle, and the ornamental iron spikes along the top looked strangely naked without heads to adorn   them. Tyrion pictured how his sister’s head might look up there, with tar in her golden hair and flies  buzzing in and out of her mouth. Yes, and Jaime must have the spike beside her, he decided. No one  must ever come between my brother and my sister.  With a rope and a grapnel he might be able to get over that wall. He had strong arms and he did  not weigh much. He should be able to clamber over, if he did not impale himself on a spike. I will search  for a rope on the morrow, he resolved.  He saw three gates during his wanderings—the main entrance with its gatehouse, a postern by  the kennels, and a garden gate hidden behind a tangle of pale ivy. The last was chained, the others  guarded. The guards were plump, their faces as smooth as babies’ bottoms, and every man of them  wore a spiked bronze cap. Tyrion knew eunuchs when he saw them. He knew their sort by reputation.  They feared nothing and felt no pain, it was said, and were loyal to their masters unto death. I could  make good use of a few hundred of mine own, he reflected. A pity I did not think of that before I became  a beggar.  He walked along a pillared gallery and through a pointed arch, and found himself in a tiled  courtyard where a woman was washing clothes at a well. She looked to be his own age, with dull red  hair and a broad face dotted by freckles. “Would you like some wine?” he asked her. She looked at him  uncertainly. “I have no cup for you, we’ll have to share.” The wash-erwoman went back to wringing out  tunics and hanging them to dry. Tyrion settled on a stone bench with his flagon. “Tell me, how far should  I trust Magister Illyrio?” The name made her look up. “That far?” Chuckling, he crossed his stunted legs  and took a drink. “I am loath to play whatever part the cheesemonger has in mind for me, yet how can I  refuse him? The gates are guarded. Perhaps you might smuggle me out under your skirts? I’d be so  grateful; why, I’ll even wed you. I have two wives already, why not three? Ah, but where would we  live?” He gave her as pleasant a smile as a man with half a nose could manage. “I have a niece in  Sunspear, did I tell you? I could make rather a lot of mischief in Dorne with Myrcella. I could set my  niece and nephew at war, wouldn’t that be droll?” The washerwoman pinned up one of Illyrio’s tunics,  large enough to double as a sail. “I should be ashamed to think such evil thoughts, you’re quite right.  Better if I sought the Wall instead. All crimes are wiped clean when a man joins the Night’s Watch, they  say. Though I fear they would not let me keep you, sweetling. No women in the Watch, no sweet freckly  wives to warm your bed at night, only cold winds, salted cod, and small beer. Do you think I might stand  taller in black, my lady?” He filled his cup again. “What do you say? North or south? Shall I atone for old  sins or make some new ones?”  The washerwoman gave him one last glance, picked up her basket, and walked away. I cannot  seem to hold a wife for very long, Tyrion reflected. Somehow his flagon had gone dry. Perhaps I should  stumble back down to the cellars. The strongwine was making his head spin, though, and the cellar steps  were very steep. “Where do whores go?” he asked the wash flapping on the line. Perhaps he should  have asked the washerwoman. Not to imply that you’re a whore, my dear, but perhaps you know where  they go. Or better yet, he should have asked his father. “Wherever whores go,” Lord Tywin said. She  loved me. She was a crofter’s daughter, she loved me and she wed me, she put her trust in me.   The empty flagon slipped from his hand and rolled across the yard. Tyrion pushed himself off  the bench and went to fetch it. As he did, he saw some mushrooms growing up from a cracked paving  tile. Pale white they were, with speckles, and red-ribbed undersides dark as blood. The dwarf snapped  one off and sniffed it. Delicious, he thought, and deadly.  There were seven of the mushrooms. Perhaps the Seven were trying to tell him something. He  picked them all, snatched a glove down from the line, wrapped them carefully, and stuffed them down  his pocket. The effort made him dizzy, so afterward he crawled back onto the bench, curled up, and shut  his eyes.  When he woke again, he was back in his bedchamber, drowning in the goose-down feather bed  once more while a blond girl shook his shoulder. “My lord,” she said, “your bath awaits. Magister Illyrio  expects you at table within the hour.”  Tyrion propped himself against the pillows, his head in his hands. “Do I dream, or do you speak  the Common Tongue?”  “Yes, my lord. I was bought to please the king.” She was blue-eyed and fair, young and willowy.  “I am sure you did. I need a cup of wine.”  She poured for him. “Magister Illyrio said that I am to scrub your back and warm your bed. My  name—”  “—is of no interest to me. Do you know where whores go?” She flushed. “Whores sell  themselves for coin.”  “Or jewels, or gowns, or castles. But where do they go?”  The girl could not grasp the question. “Is it a riddle, m’lord? I’m no good at riddles. Will you tell  me the answer?”  No, he thought. I despise riddles, myself. “I will tell you nothing. Do me the same favor.” The only  part of you that interests me is the part between your legs, he almost said. The words were on his  tongue, but somehow never passed his lips. She is not Shae, the dwarf told himself, only some little fool  who thinks I play at riddles. If truth be told, even her cunt did not interest him much. I must be sick, or  dead. “You mentioned a bath? We must not keep the great cheesemonger waiting.”  As he bathed, the girl washed his feet, scrubbed his back, and brushed his hair. Afterward she  rubbed sweet-smelling ointment into his calves to ease the aches, and dressed him once again in boy’s  clothing, a musty pair of burgundy breeches and a blue velvet doublet lined with cloth-of-gold. “Will my  lord want me after he has eaten?” she asked as she was lacing up his boots.  “No. I am done with women.” Whores.   The girl took that disappointment too well for his liking. “If m’lord would prefer a boy, I can have  one waiting in his bed.”  M’lord would prefer his wife. M’lord would prefer a girl named Tysha. “Only if he knows where  whores go.”  The girl’s mouth tightened. She despises me, he realized, but no more than I despise myself. That  he had fucked many a woman who loathed the very sight of him, Tyrion Lannister had no doubt, but the  others had at least the grace to feign affection. A little honest loathing might be refreshing, like a tart  wine after too much sweet.  “I believe I have changed my mind,” he told her. “Wait for me abed. Naked, if you please, I’ll be  a deal too drunk to fumble at your clothing. Keep your mouth shut and your thighs open and the two of  us should get on splendidly.” He gave her a leer, hoping for a taste of fear, but all she gave him was  revulsion. No one fears a dwarf. Even Lord Tywin had not been afraid, though Tyrion had held a  crossbow in his hands. “Do you moan when you are being fucked?” he asked the bedwarmer.  “If it please m’lord.”  “It might please m’lord to strangle you. That’s how I served my last whore. Do you think your  master would object? Surely not. He has a hundred more like you, but no one else like me.” This time,  when he grinned, he got the fear he wanted.  Illyrio was reclining on a padded couch, gobbling hot peppers and pearl onions from a wooden  bowl. His brow was dotted with beads of sweat, his pig’s eyes shining above his fat cheeks. Jewels  danced when he moved his hands; onyx and opal, tiger’s eye and tourmaline, ruby, amethyst, sapphire,  emerald, jet and jade, a black diamond, and a green pearl. I could live for years on his rings, Tyrion  mused, though I’d need a cleaver to claim them.  “Come sit, my little friend.” Illyrio waved him closer.  The dwarf clambered up onto a chair. It was much too big for him, a cushioned throne intended  to accommodate the magister’s massive buttocks, with thick sturdy legs to bear his weight. Tyrion  Lannister had lived all his life in a world that was too big for him, but in the manse of Illyrio Mopatis the  sense of disproportion assumed grotesque dimensions. I am a mouse in a mammoth’s lair, he mused,  though at least the mammoth keeps a good cellar. The thought made him thirsty. He called for wine.  “Did you enjoy the girl I sent you?” Illyrio asked. “If I had wanted a girl I would have asked for  one.”  “If she failed to please …”  “She did all that was required of her.”  “I would hope so. She was trained in Lys, where they make an art of love. The king enjoyed her  greatly.”   “I kill kings, hadn’t you heard?” Tyrion smiled evilly over his wine cup. “I want no royal leavings.”  “As you wish. Let us eat.” Illyrio clapped his hands together, and serving men came running.  They began with a broth of crab and monkfish, and cold egg lime soup as well. Then came quails  in honey, a saddle of lamb, goose livers drowned in wine, buttered parsnips, and suckling pig. The sight  of it all made Tyrion feel queasy, but he forced himself to try a spoon of soup for the sake of politeness,  and once he had tasted it he was lost. The cooks might be old and fat, but they knew their business. He  had never eaten so well, even at court.  As he was sucking the meat off the bones of his quail, he asked Illyrio about the morning’s  summons. The fat man shrugged. “There are troubles in the east. Astapor has fallen, and Meereen.  Ghiscari slave cities that were old when the world was young.” The suckling pig was carved. Illyrio  reached for a piece of the crackling, dipped it in a plum sauce, and ate it with his fingers.  “Slaver’s Bay is a long way from Pentos.” Tyrion speared a goose liver on the point of his knife.  No man is as cursed as the kinslayer, he mused, but I could learn to like this hell.  “This is so,” Illyrio agreed, “but the world is one great web, and a man dare not touch a single  strand lest all the others tremble. More wine?” Illyrio popped a pepper into his mouth. “No, something  better.” He clapped his hands together.  At the sound a serving man entered with a covered dish. He placed it in front of Tyrion, and  Illyrio leaned across the table to remove the lid. “Mushrooms,” the magister announced, as the smell  wafted up. “Kissed with garlic and bathed in butter. I am told the taste is exquisite. Have one, my friend.  Have two.”  Tyrion had a fat black mushroom halfway to his mouth, but something in Illyrio’s voice made  him stop abruptly. “After you, my lord.” He pushed the dish toward his host.  “No, no.” Magister Illyrio pushed the mushrooms back. For a heartbeat it seemed as if a  mischievous boy was peering out from inside the cheese-monger’s bloated flesh. “After you. I insist.  Cook made them specially for you.”  “Did she indeed?” He remembered the cook, the flour on her hands, heavy breasts shot through  with dark blue veins. “That was kind of her, but … no.” Tyrion eased the mushroom back into the lake of  butter from which it had emerged.  “You are too suspicious.” Illyrio smiled through his forked yellow beard. Oiled every morning to  make it gleam like gold, Tyrion suspected. “Are you craven? I had not heard that of you.”  “In the Seven Kingdoms it is considered a grave breach of hospitality to poison your guest at  supper.”  “Here as well.” Illyrio Mopatis reached for his wine cup. “Yet when a guest plainly wishes to end  his own life, why, his host must oblige him, no?” He took a gulp. “Magister Ordello was poisoned by a   mushroom not half a year ago. The pain is not so much, I am told. Some cramping in the gut, a sudden  ache behind the eyes, and it is done. Better a mushroom than a sword through your neck, is it not so?  Why die with the taste of blood in your mouth when it could be butter and garlic?”  The dwarf studied the dish before him. The smell of garlic and butter had his mouth watering.  Some part of him wanted those mushrooms, even knowing what they were. He was not brave enough  to take cold steel to his own belly, but a bite of mushroom would not be so hard. That frightened him  more than he could say. “You mistake me,” he heard himself say.  “Is it so? I wonder. If you would sooner drown in wine, say the word and it shall be done, and  quickly. Drowning cup by cup wastes time and wine both.”  “You mistake me,” Tyrion said again, more loudly. The buttered mushrooms glistened in the  lamplight, dark and inviting. “I have no wish to die, I promise you. I have …” His voice trailed off into  uncertainty. What do I have? A life to live? Work to do? Children to raise, lands to rule, a woman to love?  “You have nothing,” finished Magister Illyrio, “but we can change that.” He plucked a mushroom  from the butter, and chewed it lustily. “Delicious.”  “The mushrooms are not poisoned.” Tyrion was irritated.  “No. Why should I wish you ill?” Magister Illyrio ate another. “We must show a little trust, you  and I. Come, eat.” He clapped his hands again. “We have work to do. My little friend must keep his  strength up.”  The serving men brought out a heron stuffed with figs, veal cutlets blanched with almond milk,  creamed herring, candied onions, foul-smelling cheeses, plates of snails and sweetbreads, and a black  swan in her plumage. Tyrion refused the swan, which reminded him of a supper with his sister. He  helped himself to heron and herring, though, and a few of the sweet onions. And the serving men filled  his wine cup anew each time he emptied it.  “You drink a deal of wine for such a little man.”  “Kinslaying is dry work. It gives a man a thirst.”  The fat man’s eyes glittered like the gemstones on his fingers. “There are those in Westeros who  would say that killing Lord Lannister was merely a good beginning.”  “They had best not say it in my sister’s hearing, or they will find themselves short a tongue.” The  dwarf tore a loaf of bread in half. “And you had best be careful what you say of my family, magister.  Kinslayer or no, I am a lion still.”  That seemed to amuse the lord of cheese no end. He slapped a meaty thigh and said, “You  Westerosi are all the same. You sew some beast upon a scrap of silk, and suddenly you are all lions or  dragons or eagles. I can take you to a real lion, my little friend. The prince keeps a pride in his  menagerie. Would you like to share a cage with them?”   The lords of the Seven Kingdoms did make rather much of their sigils, Tyrion had to admit. “Very  well,” he conceded. “A Lannister is not a lion. Yet I am still my father’s son, and Jaime and Cersei are  mine to kill.”  “How odd that you should mention your fair sister,” said Illyrio, between snails. “The queen has  offered a lordship to the man who brings her your head, no matter how humble his birth.”  It was no more than Tyrion had expected. “If you mean to take her up on it, make her spread  her legs for you as well. The best part of me for the best part of her, that’s a fair trade.”  “I would sooner have mine own weight in gold.” The cheesemonger laughed so hard that Tyrion  feared he was about to rupture. “All the gold in Casterly Rock, why not?”  “The gold I grant you,” the dwarf said, relieved that he was not about to drown in a gout of  half-digested eels and sweetmeats, “but the Rock is mine.”  “Just so.” The magister covered his mouth and belched a mighty belch. “Do you think King  Stannis will give it to you? I am told he is a great one for the law. Your brother wears the white cloak, so  you are heir by all the laws of Westeros.”  “Stannis might well grant me Casterly Rock,” said Tyrion, “but for the small matter of regicide  and kinslaying. For those he would shorten me by a head, and I am short enough as I stand. But why  would you think I mean to join Lord Stannis?”  “Why else would you go the Wall?”  “Stannis is at the Wall?” Tyrion rubbed at his nose. “What in seven bloody hells is Stannis doing  at the Wall?”  “Shivering, I would think. It is warmer down in Dorne. Perhaps he should have sailed that way.”  Tyrion was beginning to suspect that a certain freckled washerwoman knew more of the  Common Speech than she pretended. “My niece Myrcella is in Dorne, as it happens. And I have half a  mind to make her a queen.”  Illyrio smiled as his serving men spooned out bowls of black cherries in sweet cream for them  both. “What has this poor child done to you that you would wish her dead?”  “Even a kinslayer is not required to slay all his kin,” said Tyrion, wounded. “Queen her, I said.  Not kill her.”  The cheesemonger spooned up cherries. “In Volantis they use a coin with a crown on one face  and a death’s-head on the other. Yet it is the same coin. To queen her is to kill her. Dorne might rise for  Myrcella, but Dorne alone is not enough. If you are as clever as our friend insists, you know this.”   Tyrion looked at the fat man with new interest. He is right on both counts. To queen her is to kill  her. And I knew that. “Futile gestures are all that remain to me. This one would make my sister weep  bitter tears, at least.”  Magister Illyrio wiped sweet cream from his mouth with the back of a fat hand. “The road to  Casterly Rock does not go through Dorne, my little friend. Nor does it run beneath the Wall. Yet there is  such a road, I tell you.”  “I am an attainted traitor, a regicide, and kinslayer.” This talk of roads annoyed him. Does he  think this is a game?  “What one king does, another may undo. In Pentos we have a prince, my friend. He presides at  ball and feast and rides about the city in a palanquin of ivory and gold. Three heralds go before him with  the golden scales of trade, the iron sword of war, and the silver scourge of justice. On the first day of  each new year he must deflower the maid of the fields and the maid of the seas.” Illyrio leaned forward,  elbows on the table. “Yet should a crop fail or a war be lost, we cut his throat to appease the gods and  choose a new prince from amongst the forty families.”  “Remind me never to become the Prince of Pentos.”  “Are your Seven Kingdoms so different? There is no peace in Westeros, no justice, no faith …  and soon enough, no food. When men are starving and sick of fear, they look for a savior.”  “They may look, but if all they find is Stannis—”  “Not Stannis. Nor Myrcella.” The yellow smile widened. “Another. Stronger than Tommen,  gentler than Stannis, with a better claim than the girl Myrcella. A savior come from across the sea to  bind up the wounds of bleeding Westeros.”  “Fine words.” Tyrion was unimpressed. “Words are wind. Who is this bloody savior?”  “A dragon.” The cheesemonger saw the look on his face at that, and laughed. “A dragon with  three heads.”  They departed Pentos by the Sunrise Gate, though Tyrion Lannister never glimpsed the sunrise.  “It will be as if you had never come to Pentos, my little friend,” promised Magister Illyrio, as he drew  shut the litter’s purple velvet drapes. “No man must see you leave the city, as no man saw you enter.”  “No man except the sailors who stuffed me in that barrel, the cabin boy who cleaned up after  me, the girl you sent to warm my bed, and that treacherous freckled washerwoman. Oh, and your  guards. Unless you removed their wits along with their balls, they know you’re not alone in here.” The  litter was suspended between eight mammoth draft horses on heavy leather straps. Four eunuchs paced  beside the horses, two to either side, and more were trudging along behind to guard the baggage train.  “Unsullied tell no tales,” Illyrio assured him. “And the galley that delivered you is on her way to  Asshai even now. It will be two years before she returns, if the seas are kind. As for my household, they  love me well. None would betray me.”  Cherish that thought, my fat friend. One day we will carve those words upon your crypt. “We  should be aboard that galley,” the dwarf said. “The fastest way to Volantis is by sea.”  “The sea is hazardous,” replied Illyrio. “Autumn is a season rife with storms, and pirates still  make their dens upon the Stepstones and venture forth to prey on honest men. It would never do for  my little friend to fall into such hands.”  “There are pirates on the Rhoyne as well.”  “River pirates.” The cheesemonger gave a yawn, covering his mouth with the back of his hand.  “Cockroach captains scurrying after crumbs.”  “One hears talk of stone men as well.”   “They are real enough, poor damned things. But why speak of such things? The day is too fine  for such talk. We shall see the Rhoyne soon, and there you shall be rid of Illyrio and his big belly. Till  then, let us drink and dream. We have sweet wine and savories to enjoy. Why dwell upon disease and  death?”  Why indeed? Tyrion heard the thrum of a crossbow once again, and wondered. The litter  swayed side to side, a soothing movement that made him feel as if he were a child being rocked to sleep  in his mother’s arms. Not that I would know what that was like. Silk pillows stuffed with goose down  cushioned his cheeks. The purple velvet walls curved overhead to form a roof, making it pleasantly  warm within despite the autumn chill outside.  A train of mules trailed behind them, carrying chests and casks and barrels, and hampers of  delectables to keep the lord of cheese from growing peckish. They nibbled on spiced sausage that  morning, washed down with a dark smokeberry brown. Jellied eels and Dornish reds filled their  afternoon. Come evening there were sliced hams, boiled eggs, and roasted larks stuffed with garlic and  onions, with pale ales and Myrish fire wines to help in their digestion. The litter was as slow as it was  comfortable, however, and the dwarf soon found himself itching with impatience.  “How many days until we reach the river?” he asked Illyrio that evening. “At this pace, your  queen’s dragons will be larger than Aegon’s three before I can lay eyes upon them.”  “Would it were so. A large dragon is more fearsome than a small one.” The magister shrugged.  “Much as it would please me to welcome Queen Daenerys to Volantis, I must rely on you and Griff for  that. I can serve her best in Pentos, smoothing the way for her return. So long as I am with you, though  … well, an old fat man must have his comforts, yes? Come, drink a cup of wine.”  “Tell me,” Tyrion said as he drank, “why should a magister of Pentos give three figs who wears  the crown in Westeros? Where is the gain for you in this venture, my lord?”  The fat man dabbed grease from his lips. “I am an old man, grown weary of this world and its  treacheries. Is it so strange that I should wish to do some good before my days are done, to help a sweet  young girl regain her birthright?”  Next you will be offering me a suit of magic armor and a palace in Valyria. “If Daenerys is no  more than a sweet young girl, the Iron Throne will cut her into sweet young pieces.”  “Fear not, my little friend. The blood of Aegon the Dragon flows in her veins.”  Along with the blood of Aegon the Unworthy, Maegor the Cruel, and Baelor the Befuddled. “Tell  me more of her.”  The fat man grew pensive. “Daenerys was half a child when she came to me, yet fairer even  than my second wife, so lovely I was tempted to claim her for myself. Such a fearful, furtive thing,  however, I knew I should get no joy from coupling with her. Instead I summoned a bed-warmer and   fucked her vigorously until the madness passed. If truth be told, I did not think Daenerys would survive  for long amongst the horselords.”  “That did not stop you selling her to Khal Drogo …”  “Dothraki neither buy nor sell. Say rather that her brother Viserys gave her to Drogo to win the  khal’s friendship. A vain young man, and greedy. Viserys lusted for his father’s throne, but he lusted for  Daenerys too, and was loath to give her up. The night before the princess wed he tried to steal into her  bed, insisting that if he could not have her hand, he would claim her maidenhead. Had I not taken the  precaution of posting guards upon her door, Viserys might have undone years of planning.”  “He sounds an utter fool.”  “Viserys was Mad Aerys’s son, just so. Daenerys … Daenerys is quite different.” He popped a  roasted lark into his mouth and crunched it noisily, bones and all. “The frightened child who sheltered in  my manse died on the Dothraki sea, and was reborn in blood and fire. This dragon queen who wears her  name is a true Targaryen. When I sent ships to bring her home, she turned toward Slaver’s Bay. In a  short span of days she conquered Astapor, made Yunkai bend the knee, and sacked Meereen. Mantarys  will be next, if she marches west along the old Valyrian roads. If she comes by sea, well … her fleet must  take on food and water at Volantis.”  “By land or by sea, there are long leagues between Meereen and Volantis,” Tyrion observed.  “Five hundred fifty, as the dragon flies, through deserts, mountains, swamps, and  demon-haunted ruins. Many and more will perish, but those who survive will be stronger by the time  they reach Volantis … where they shall find you and Griff awaiting them, with fresh forces and sufficient  ships to carry them all across the sea to Westeros.”  Tyrion pondered all he knew of Volantis, oldest and proudest of the Nine Free Cities. Something  was awry here. Even with half a nose, he could smell it. “It’s said there are five slaves for every free man  in Volantis. Why would the triarchs assist a queen who smashed the slave trade?” He pointed at Illyrio.  “For that matter, why would you? Slavery may be forbidden by the laws of Pentos, yet you have a finger  in that trade as well, and maybe a whole hand. And yet you conspire for the dragon queen, and not  against her. Why? What do you hope to gain from Queen Daenerys?”  “Are we back to that again? You are a persistent little man.” Illyrio gave a laugh and slapped his  belly. “As you will. The Beggar King swore that I should be his master of coin, and a lordly lord as well.  Once he wore his golden crown, I should have my choice of castles … even Casterly Rock, if I desired.”  Tyrion snorted wine back up the scarred stump that had been his nose. “My father would have  loved to hear that.”  “Your lord father had no cause for concern. Why would I want a rock? My manse is large enough  for any man, and more comfortable than your drafty Westerosi castles. Master of coin, though …” The   fat man peeled another egg. “I am fond of coins. Is there any sound as sweet as the clink of gold on  gold?”  A sister’s screams. “Are you quite certain that Daenerys will make good her brother’s  promises?”  “She will, or she will not.” Illyrio bit the egg in half. “I told you, my little friend, not all that a man  does is done for gain. Believe as you wish, but even fat old fools like me have friends, and debts of  affection to repay.”  Liar, thought Tyrion. There is something in this venture worth more to you than coin or castles.  “You meet so few men who value friendship over gold these days.”  “Too true,” the fat man said, deaf to the irony. “How is it that the Spider became so dear to  you?”  “We were young together, two green boys in Pentos.”  “Varys came from Myr.”  “So he did. I met him not long after he arrived, one step ahead of the slavers. By day he slept in  the sewers, by night he prowled the rooftops like a cat. I was near as poor, a bravo in soiled silks, living  by my blade. Perhaps you chanced to glimpse the statue by my pool? Pytho Malanon carved that when I  was six-and-ten. A lovely thing, though now I weep to see it.”  “Age makes ruins of us all. I am still in mourning for my nose. But Varys …”  “In Myr he was a prince of thieves, until a rival thief informed on him. In Pentos his accent  marked him, and once he was known for a eunuch he was despised and beaten. Why he chose me to  protect him I may never know, but we came to an arrangement. Varys spied on lesser thieves and took  their takings. I offered my help to their victims, promising to recover their valuables for a fee. Soon  every man who had suffered a loss knew to come to me, whilst city’s footpads and cutpurses sought out  Varys … half to slit his throat, the other half to sell him what they’d stolen. We both grew rich, and richer  still when Varys trained his mice.”  “In King’s Landing he kept little birds.”  “Mice, we called them then. The older thieves were fools who thought no further than turning a  night’s plunder into wine. Varys preferred orphan boys and young girls. He chose the smallest, the ones  who were quick and quiet, and taught them to climb walls and slip down chimneys. He taught them to  read as well. We left the gold and gems for common thieves. Instead our mice stole letters, ledgers,  charts … later, they would read them and leave them where they lay. Secrets are worth more than silver  or sapphires, Varys claimed. Just so. I grew so respectable that a cousin of the Prince of Pentos let me  wed his maiden daughter, whilst whispers of a certain eunuch’s talents crossed the narrow sea and  reached the ears of a certain king. A very anxious king, who did not wholly trust his son, nor his wife, nor   his Hand, a friend of his youth who had grown arrogant and overproud. I do believe that you know the  rest of this tale, is that not so?”  “Much of it,” Tyrion admitted. “I see that you are somewhat more than a cheesemonger after  all.”  Illyrio inclined his head. “You are kind to say so, my little friend. And for my part, I see that you  are just as quick as Lord Varys claimed.” He smiled, showing all his crooked yellow teeth, and shouted  for another jar of Myrish fire wine.  When the magister drifted off to sleep with the wine jar at his elbow, Tyrion crept across the  pillows to work it loose from its fleshy prison and pour himself a cup. He drained it down, and yawned,  and filled it once again. If I drink enough fire wine, he told himself, perhaps I’ll dream of dragons.  When he was still a lonely child in the depths of Casterly Rock, he oft rode dragons through the  nights, pretending he was some lost Targaryen princeling, or a Valyrian dragonlord soaring high o’er  fields and mountains. Once, when his uncles asked him what gift he wanted for his name-day, he  begged them for a dragon. “It wouldn’t need to be a big one. It could be little, like I am.” His uncle  Gerion thought that was the funniest thing he had ever heard, but his uncle Tygett said, “The last dragon  died a century ago, lad.” That had seemed so monstrously unfair that the boy had cried himself to sleep  that night.  Yet if the lord of cheese could be believed, the Mad King’s daughter had hatched three living  dragons. Two more than even a Targaryen should require. Tyrion was almost sorry that he had killed his  father. He would have enjoyed seeing Lord Tywin’s face when he learned that there was a Targaryen  queen on her way to Westeros with three dragons, backed by a scheming eunuch and a cheesemonger  half the size of Casterly Rock.  The dwarf was so stuffed that he had to undo his belt and the topmost laces on his breeches.  The boy’s clothes his host had dressed him in made him feel like ten pounds of sausage in a five-pound  skin. If we eat this way every day I will be the size of Illyrio before I meet this dragon queen. Out-side the  litter night had fallen. Inside all was dark. Tyrion listened to Illyrio’s snores, the creak of the leather  straps, the slow clop clop of the team’s ironshod hooves on the hard Valyrian road, but his heart was  listening for the beat of leathern wings.  When he woke, dawn had come. The horses plodded on, the litter creaking and swaying  between them. Tyrion pulled the curtain back an inch to peer outside, but there was little to see but  ochre fields, bare brown elms, and the road itself, a broad stone highway that ran straight as a spear to  the horizon. He had read about Valyrian roads, but this was the first he had seen. The Freehold’s grasp  had reached as far as Dragonstone, but never to the mainland of Westeros itself. Odd, that.  Dragonstone is no more than a rock. The wealth was farther west, but they had dragons. Surely they  knew that it was there.   He had drunk too much last night. His head was pounding, and even the gentle swaying of the  litter was enough to make his gorge rise in his throat. Though he said no word of complaint, his distress  must have been plain to Illyrio Mopatis. “Come, drink with me,” the fat man said. “A scale from the  dragon that burned you, as they say.” He poured for them from a flagon of blackberry wine so sweet  that it drew more flies than honey. Tyrion shooed them off with the back of his hand and drank deep.  The taste was so cloying that it was all he could do to keep it down. The second cup went down easier,  however. Even so, he had no appetite, and when Illyrio offered him a bowl of blackberries in cream he  waved it off. “I dreamed about the queen,” he said. “I was on my knees before her, swearing my  allegiance, but she mistook me for my brother, Jaime, and fed me to her dragons.”  “Let us hope this dream was not prophetic. You are a clever imp, just as Varys said, and  Daenerys will have need of clever men about her. Ser Barristan is a valiant knight and true; but none, I  think, has ever called him cunning.”  “Knights know only one way to solve a problem. They couch their lances and charge. A dwarf  has a different way of looking at the world. What of you, though? You are a clever man yourself.”  “You flatter me.” Illyrio waggled his hand. “Alas, I am not made for travel, so I will send you to  Daenerys in my stead. You did Her Grace a great service when you slew your father, and it is my hope  that you will do her many more. Daenerys is not the fool her brother was. She will make good use of  you.”  As kindling? Tyrion thought, smiling pleasantly.  They changed out teams only thrice that day but seemed to halt twice an hour at the least so  Illyrio could climb down from the litter and have himself a piss. Our lord of cheese is the size of an  elephant, but he has a bladder like a peanut, the dwarf mused. During one stop, he used the time to  have a closer look at the road. Tyrion knew what he would find: not packed earth, nor bricks, nor  cobbles, but a ribbon of fused stone raised a half foot above the ground to allow rainfall and snowmelt  to run off its shoulders. Unlike the muddy tracks that passed for roads in the Seven Kingdoms, the  Valyrian roads were wide enough for three wagons to pass abreast, and neither time nor traffic marred  them. They still endured, unchanging, four centuries after Valyria itself had met its Doom. He looked for  ruts and cracks but found only a pile of warm dung deposited by one of the horses.  The dung made him think of his lord father. Are you down in some hell, Father? A nice cold hell  where you can look up and see me help restore Mad Aerys’s daughter to the Iron Throne?  As they resumed their journey, Illyrio produced a bag of roasted chestnuts and began to speak  once more of the dragon queen. “Our last news of Queen Daenerys is old and stale, I fear. By now she  will have left Meereen, we must assume. She has her host at last, a ragged host of sellswords, Dothraki  horselords, and Unsullied infantry, and she will no doubt lead them west, to take back her father’s  throne.” Magister Illyrio twisted open a pot of garlic snails, sniffed at them, and smiled. “At Volantis, you  will have fresh tidings of Daenerys, we must hope,” he said, as he sucked one from its shell. “Dragons   and young girls are both capricious, and it may be that you will need to adjust your plans. Griff will know  what to do. Will you have a snail? The garlic is from my own gardens.”  I could ride a snail and make a better pace than this litter of yours. Tyrion waved the dish away.  “You place a deal of trust in this man Griff. Another friend of your childhood?”  “No. A sellsword, you would call him, but Westerosi born. Daenerys needs men worthy of her  cause.” Illyrio raised a hand. “I know! ‘Sellswords put gold before honor,’ you are thinking. ‘This man  Griff will sell me to my sister.’ Not so. I trust Griff as I would trust a brother.”  Another mortal error. “Then I shall do likewise.”  “The Golden Company marches toward Volantis as we speak, there to await the coming of our  queen out of the east.”  Beneath the gold, the bitter steel. “I had heard the Golden Company was under contract with  one of the Free Cities.”  “Myr.” Illyrio smirked. “Contracts can be broken.”  “There is more coin in cheese than I knew,” said Tyrion. “How did you accomplish that?”  The magister waggled his fat fingers. “Some contracts are writ in ink, and some in blood. I say no  more.”  The dwarf pondered that. The Golden Company was reputedly the finest of the free companies,  founded a century ago by Bittersteel, a bastard son of Aegon the Unworthy. When another of Aegon’s  Great Bastards tried to seize the Iron Throne from his trueborn half-brother, Bittersteel joined the  revolt. Daemon Blackfyre had perished on the Redgrass Field, however, and his rebellion with him.  Those followers of the Black Dragon who survived the battle yet refused to bend the knee fled across  the narrow sea, among them Daemon’s younger sons, Bittersteel, and hundreds of landless lords and  knights who soon found themselves forced to sell their swords to eat. Some joined the Ragged Standard,  some the Second Sons or Maiden’s Men. Bittersteel saw the strength of House Blackfyre scattering to  the four winds, so he formed the Golden Company to bind the exiles together.  From that day to this, the men of the Golden Company had lived and died in the Disputed Lands,  fighting for Myr or Lys or Tyrosh in their pointless little wars, and dreaming of the land their fathers had  lost. They were exiles and sons of exiles, dispossessed and unforgiven … yet formidable fighters still.  “I admire your powers of persuasion,” Tyrion told Illyrio. “How did you convince the Golden  Company to take up the cause of our sweet queen when they have spent so much of their history  fighting against the Targaryens?”  Illyrio brushed away the objection as if it were a fly. “Black or red, a dragon is still a dragon.  When Maelys the Monstrous died upon the Stepstones, it was the end of the male line of House   Blackfyre.” The cheesemonger smiled through his forked beard. “And Daenerys will give the exiles what  Bittersteel and the Blackfyres never could. She will take them home.”  With fire and sword. It was the kind of homecoming that Tyrion wished for as well. “Ten  thousand swords makes for a princely gift, I grant you. Her Grace should be most pleased.”  The magister gave a modest bob of his head, chins jiggling. “I would never presume to say what  might please Her Grace.”  Prudent of you. Tyrion knew much and more about the gratitude of kings. Why should queens  be any different?  Soon enough the magister was fast asleep, leaving Tyrion to brood alone. He wondered what  Barristan Selmy would think of riding into battle with the Golden Company. During the War of the  Ninepenny Kings, Selmy had cut a bloody path through their ranks to slay the last of the Blackfyre  Pretenders. Rebellion makes for queer bedfellows. And none more queer than this fat man and me.  The cheesemonger woke when they stopped to change the horses and sent for a fresh hamper.  “How far have we come?” the dwarf asked him as they stuffed themselves with cold capon and a relish  made of carrots, raisins, and bits of lime and orange.  “This is Andalos, my friend. The land your Andals came from. They took it from the hairy men  who were here before them, cousins to the hairy men of Ib. The heart of Hugor’s ancient realm lies  north of us, but we are passing through its southern marches. In Pentos, these are called the Flatlands.  Farther east stand the Velvet Hills, whence we are bound.”  Andalos. The Faith taught that the Seven themselves had once walked the hills of Andalos in  human form. “The Father reached his hand into the heavens and pulled down seven stars,” Tyrion  recited from memory, “and one by one he set them on the brow of Hugor of the Hill to make a glowing  crown.”  Magister Illyrio gave him a curious look. “I did not dream my little friend was so devout.”  The dwarf shrugged. “A relic of my boyhood. I knew I would not make a knight, so I decided to  be High Septon. That crystal crown adds a foot to a man’s height. I studied the holy books and prayed  until I had scabs on both my knees, but my quest came to a tragic end. I reached that certain age and fell  in love.”  “A maiden? I know the way of that.” Illyrio thrust his right hand up his left sleeve and drew out a  silver locket. Inside was a painted likeness of a woman with big blue eyes and pale golden hair streaked  by silver. “Serra. I found her in a Lysene pillow house and brought her home to warm my bed, but in the  end I wed her. Me, whose first wife had been a cousin of the Prince of Pentos. The palace gates were  closed to me thereafter, but I did not care. The price was small enough, for Serra.”   “How did she die?” Tyrion knew that she was dead; no man spoke so fondly of a woman who  had abandoned him.  “A Braavosi trading galley called at Pentos on her way back from the Jade Sea. The Treasure  carried cloves and saffron, jet and jade, scarlet samite, green silk … and the grey death. We slew her  oarsmen as they came ashore and burned the ship at anchor, but the rats crept down the oars and  paddled to the quay on cold stone feet. The plague took two thousand before it ran its course.”  Magister Illyrio closed the locket. “I keep her hands in my bedchamber. Her hands that were so soft …”  Tyrion thought of Tysha. He glanced out at the fields where once the gods had walked. “What  sort of gods make rats and plagues and dwarfs?” Another passage from The Seven-Pointed Star came  back to him. “The Maid brought him forth a girl as supple as a willow with eyes like deep blue pools, and  Hugor declared that he would have her for his bride. So the Mother made her fertile, and the Crone  foretold that she would bear the king four-and-forty mighty sons. The Warrior gave strength to their  arms, whilst the Smith wrought for each a suit of iron plates.”  “Your Smith must have been Rhoynish,” Illyrio quipped. “The Andals learned the art of working  iron from the Rhoynar who dwelt along the river. This is known.”  “Not by our septons.” Tyrion gestured at the fields. “Who dwells in these Flatlands of yours?”  “Tillers and toilers, bound to the land. There are orchards, farms, mines … I own some such  myself, though I seldom visit them. Why should I spend my days out here, with the myriad delights of  Pentos close at hand?”  “Myriad delights.” And huge thick walls. Tyrion swirled his wine in his cup. “We have seen no  towns since Pentos.”  “There are ruins.” Illyrio waved a chicken leg toward the curtains. “The horselords come this  way, whenever some khal takes it into his head to gaze upon the sea. The Dothraki are not fond of  towns, you will know this even in Westeros.”  “Fall upon one of these khalasars and destroy it, and you may find that the Dothraki are not so  quick to cross the Rhoyne.”  “It is cheaper to buy off foes with food and gifts.”  If only I had thought to bring a nice cheese to the battle on the Blackwater, I might still have all  my nose. Lord Tywin had always held the Free Cities in contempt. They fight with coins instead of  swords, he used to say. Gold has its uses, but wars are won with iron. “Give gold to a foe and he will just  come back for more, my father always said.”  “Is this the selfsame father that you murdered?” Illyrio tossed his chicken bone from the litter.  “Sellswords will not stand against Dothraki screamers. That was proved at Qohor.”   “Not even your brave Griff?” mocked Tyrion. “Griff is different. He has a son he dotes on. Young  Griff, the boy is called. There never was a nobler lad.”  The wine, the food, the sun, the sway of the litter, the buzzing of the flies, all conspired to make  Tyrion sleepy. So he slept, woke, drank. Illyrio matched him cup for cup. And as the sky turned a dusky  purple, the fat man began to snore.  That night Tyrion Lannister dreamed of a battle that turned the hills of Westeros as red as blood.  He was in the midst of it, dealing death with an axe as big as he was, fighting side by side with Barristan  the Bold and Bittersteel as dragons wheeled across the sky above them. In the dream he had two heads,  both noseless. His father led the enemy, so he slew him once again. Then he killed his brother, Jaime,  hacking at his face until it was a red ruin, laughing every time he struck a blow. Only when the fight was  finished did he realize that his second head was weeping.  When he woke his stunted legs were stiff as iron. Illyrio was eating olives. “Where are we?”  Tyrion asked him.  “We have not yet left the Flatlands, my hasty friend. Soon our road shall pass into the Velvet  Hills. There we begin our climb toward Ghoyan Drohe, upon the Little Rhoyne.”  Ghoyan Drohe had been a Rhoynar city, until the dragons of Valyria had reduced it to a  smoldering desolation. I am traveling through years as well as leagues, Tyrion reflected, back through  history to the days when dragons ruled the earth.  Tyrion slept and woke and slept again, and day and night seemed not to matter. The Velvet Hills  proved a disappointment. “Half the whores in Lannisport have breasts bigger than these hills,” he told  Illyrio. “You ought to call them the Velvet Teats.” They saw a circle of standing stones that Illyrio claimed  had been raised by giants, and later a deep lake. “Here lived a den of robbers who preyed on all who  passed this way,” Illyrio said. “It is said they still dwell beneath the water. Those who fish the lake are  pulled under and devoured.” The next evening they came upon a huge Valyrian sphinx crouched beside  the road. It had a dragon’s body and a woman’s face.  “A dragon queen,” said Tyrion. “A pleasant omen.”  “Her king is missing.” Illyrio pointed out the smooth stone plinth on which the second sphinx  once stood, now grown over with moss and flowering vines. “The horselords built wooden wheels  beneath him and dragged him back to Vaes Dothrak.”  That is an omen too, thought Tyrion, but not as hopeful. That night, drunker than usual, he  broke into sudden song.  He rode through the streets of the city, down from his hill on high,  O’er the wynds and the steps and the cobbles, he rode to a woman’s sigh.  For she was his secret treasure, she was his shame and his bliss.   And a chain and a keep are nothing, compared to a woman’s kiss.  Those were all the words he knew, aside from the refrain. Hands of gold are always cold, but a  woman’s hands are warm. Shae’s hands had beat at him as the golden hands dug into her throat. He did  not remember if they’d been warm or not. As the strength went out of her, her blows became moths  fluttering about his face. Each time he gave the chain another twist the golden hands dug deeper. A  chain and a keep are nothing, compared to a woman’s kiss. Had he kissed her one last time, after she  was dead? He could not remember … though he still recalled the first time they had kissed, in his tent  beside the Green Fork. How sweet her mouth had tasted.  He remembered the first time with Tysha as well. She did not know how, no more than I did. We  kept bumping our noses, but when I touched her tongue with mine she trembled. Tyrion closed his eyes  to bring her face to mind, but instead he saw his father, squatting on a privy with his bed-robe hiked up  about his waist. “Wherever whores go,” Lord Tywin said, and the crossbow thrummed.  The dwarf rolled over, pressing half a nose deep into the silken pillows. Sleep opened beneath  him like a well, and he threw himself into it with a will and let the darkness eat him up.  THE MERCHANT’S MAN  Adventure stank.  She boasted sixty oars, a single sail, and a long lean hull that promised speed. Small, but she  might serve, Quentyn thought when he saw her, but that was before he went aboard and got a good  whiff of her. Pigs, was his first thought, but after a second sniff he changed his mind. Pigs had a cleaner  smell. This stink was piss and rotting meat and night-soil, this was the reek of corpse flesh and weeping  sores and wounds gone bad, so strong that it overwhelmed the salt air and fish smell of the harbor.  “I want to retch,” he said to Gerris Drinkwater. They were waiting for the ship’s master to  appear, sweltering in the heat as the stench wafted up from the deck beneath them.  “If the captain smells anything like his ship, he may mistake your vomit for perfume,” Gerris  replied.  Quentyn was about to suggest that they try another ship when the master finally made his  appearance, with two vile-looking crewmen at his side. Gerris greeted him with a smile. Though he did  not speak the Volantene tongue as well as Quentyn, their ruse required that he speak for them. Back in  the Planky Town Quentyn had played the wineseller, but the mummery had chafed at him, so when the  Dornishmen changed ships at Lys they had changed roles as well. Aboard the Meadowlark, Cletus  Yronwood became the merchant, Quentyn the servant; in Volantis, with Cletus slain, Gerris had  assumed the master’s role.   Tall and fair, with blue-green eyes, sandy hair streaked by the sun, and a lean and comely body,  Gerris Drinkwater had a swagger to him, a confidence bordering on arrogance. He never seemed ill at  ease, and even when he did not speak the language, he had ways of making himself understood.  Quentyn cut a poor figure by comparison— short-legged and stocky, thickly built, with hair the brown of  new-turned earth. His forehead was too high, his jaw too square, his nose too broad. A good honest  face, a girl had called it once, but you should smile more.  Smiles had never come easily for Quentyn Martell, any more than they did for his lord father.  “How swift is your Adventure?” Gerris said, in a halting approximation of High Valyrian.  The Adventure’s master recognized the accent and responded in the Common Tongue of  Westeros. “There is none swifter, honored lord. Adventure can run down the wind itself. Tell me where  you wish to sail, and swiftly I shall bring you there.”  “I seek passage to Meereen for myself and two servants.”  That gave the captain pause. “I am no stranger to Meereen. I could find the city again, aye … but  why? There are no slaves to be had in Meereen, no profit to be found there. The silver queen has put an  end to that. She has even closed the fighting pits, so a poor sailor cannot even amuse himself as he waits  to fill his holds. Tell me, my Westerosi friend, what is there in Meereen that you should want to go  there?”  The most beautiful woman in the world, thought Quentyn. My bride-to-be, if the gods are good.  Sometimes at night he lay awake imagining her face and form, and wondering why such a woman would  ever want to marry him, of all the princes in the world. I am Dorne, he told himself. She will want Dorne.  Gerris answered with the tale they had concocted. “Wine is our family trade. My father owns  extensive vineyards back in Dorne, and wishes me to find new markets. It is hoped that the good folk of  Meereen will welcome what I sell.”  “Wine? Dornish wine?” The captain was not convinced. “The slave cities are at war. Can it be  you do not know this?”  “The fighting is between Yunkai and Astapor, we had heard. Meereen is not involved.”  “Not as yet. But soon. An envoy from the Yellow City is in Volantis even now, hiring swords. The  Long Lances have already taken ship for Yunkai, and the Windblown and the Company of the Cat will  follow once they have finished filling out their ranks. The Golden Company marches east as well. All this  is known.”  “If you say so. I deal in wine, not wars. Ghiscari wine is poor stuff, all agree. The Meereenese will  pay a good price for my fine Dornish vintages.”  “Dead men do not care what kind of wine they drink.” The master of Adventure fingered his  beard. “I am not the first captain you have approached, I think. Nor the tenth.”   “No,” Gerris admitted.  “How many, then? A hundred?”  Close enough, thought Quentyn. The Volantenes were fond of boasting that the hundred isles of  Braavos could be dropped into their deep harbor and drowned. Quentyn had never seen Braavos, but he  could believe it. Rich and ripe and rotted, Volantis covered the mouth of the Rhoyne like a warm wet  kiss, stretching across hill and marsh on both sides of the river. Ships were everywhere, coming down  the river or headed out to sea, crowding the wharves and piers, taking on cargo or off-loading it:  warships and whalers and trading galleys, carracks and skiffs, cogs, great cogs, long-ships, swan ships,  ships from Lys and Tyrosh and Pentos, Qartheen spicers big as palaces, ships from Tolos and Yunkai and  the Basilisks. So many that Quentyn, seeing the port for the first time from the deck of the Meadowlark,  had told his friends that they would only linger here three days.  Yet twenty days had passed, and here they remained, still shipless. The captains of the  Melantine, the Triarch’s Daughter, and the Mermaid’s Kiss had all refused them. A mate on the Bold  Voyager had laughed in their faces. The master of the Dolphin berated them for wasting his time, and  the owner of the Seventh Son accused them of being pirates. All on the first day.  Only the captain of the Fawn had given them reasons for his refusal. “It is true that I am sailing  east,” he told them, over watered wine. “South around Valyria and thence into the sunrise. We will take  on water and provisions at New Ghis, then bend all oars toward Qarth and the Jade Gates. Every voyage  has perils, long ones more than most. Why should I seek out more danger by turning into Slaver’s Bay?  The Fawn is my livelihood. I will not risk her to take three mad Dornishmen into the middle of a war.”  Quentyn had begun to think that they might have done better to buy their own ship in the  Planky Town. That would have drawn unwanted attention, however. The Spider had informers  everywhere, even in the halls of Sunspear. “Dorne will bleed if your purpose is discovered,” his father  had warned him, as they watched the children frolic in the pools and fountains of the Water Gardens.  “What we do is treason, make no mistake. Trust only your companions, and do your best to avoid  attracting notice.”  So Gerris Drinkwater gave the captain of Adventure his most disarming smile. “Truth be told, I  have not kept count of all the cowards who refused us, but at the Merchant’s House I heard it said that  you were a bolder sort of man, the sort who might risk anything for sufficient gold.”  A smuggler, Quentyn thought. That was how the other traders styled Adventure’s master, back  at the Merchant’s House. “He is a smuggler and a slaver, half pirate and half pander, but it may be that  he is your best hope,” the innkeep had told them.  The captain rubbed thumb and forefinger together. “And how much gold would you deem  sufficient for such a voyage?”  “Thrice your usual fee for passage to Slaver’s Bay.”   “For each of you?” The captain showed his teeth in something that might have been intended as  a smile though it gave his narrow face a feral look. “Perhaps. It is true, I am a bolder man than most.  How soon will you wish to leave?”  “The morrow would not be too soon.”  “Done. Return an hour before first light, with your friends and your wines. Best to be under way  whilst Volantis sleeps, so no one will ask us inconvenient questions about our destination.”  “As you say. An hour before first light.”  The captain’s smile widened. “I am pleased that I can help you. We will have a happy voyage,  yes?”  “I am certain of it,” said Gerris. The captain called for ale then, and the two of them drank a  toast to their venture.  “A sweet man,” Gerris said afterward, as he and Quentyn made their way down to the foot of  the pier where their hired hathay waited. The air hung hot and heavy, and the sun was so bright that  both of them were squinting.  “This is a sweet city,” Quentyn agreed. Sweet enough to rot your teeth. Sweet beets were grown  in profusion hereabouts, and were served with almost every meal. The Volantenes made a cold soup of  them, as thick and rich as purple honey. Their wines were sweet as well. “I fear our happy voyage will be  short, however. That sweet man does not mean to take us to Meereen. He was too quick to accept your  offer. He’ll take thrice the usual fee, no doubt, and once he has us aboard and out of sight of land, he’ll  slit our throats and take the rest of our gold as well.”  “Or chain us to an oar, beside those wretches we were smelling. We need to find a better class  of smuggler, I think.”  Their driver awaited them beside his hathay. In Westeros, it might have been called an oxcart,  though it was a deal more ornate than any cart that Quentyn had ever seen in Dorne, and lacked an ox.  The hathay was pulled by a dwarf elephant, her hide the color of dirty snow. The streets of Old Volantis  were full of such.  Quentyn would have preferred to walk, but they were miles from their inn. Besides, the innkeep  at the Merchant’s House had warned him that traveling afoot would taint them in the eyes of foreign  captains and the native-born Volantenes alike. Persons of quality traveled by palanquin, or in the back of  a hathay … and as it happened the innkeep had a cousin who owned several such contrivances and  would be pleased to serve them in this matter.  Their driver was one of the cousin’s slaves, a small man with a wheel tattooed upon one cheek,  naked but for a breechclout and a pair of sandals. His skin was the color of teak, his eyes chips of flint.  After he had helped them up onto the cushioned bench between the cart’s two huge wooden wheels,   he clambered onto the elephant’s back. “The Merchant’s House,” Quentyn told him, “but go along the  wharves.” Beyond the waterfront and its breezes, the streets and alleys of Volantis were hot enough to  drown a man in his own sweat, at least on this side of the river.  The driver shouted something at his elephant in the local tongue. The beast began to move,  trunk swaying from side to side. The cart lurched along behind her, the driver hooting at sailors and  slaves alike to clear the way. It was easy enough to tell one from the other. The slaves were all tattooed:  a mask of blue feathers, a lightning bolt that ran from jaw to brow, a coin upon the cheek, a leopard’s  spots, a skull, a jug. Maester Kedry said there were five slaves for every free man in Volantis though he  had not lived long enough to verify his estimate. He had perished on the morning the corsairs swarmed  aboard the Meadowlark.  Quentyn lost two other friends that same day—Willam Wells with his freckles and his crooked  teeth, fearless with a lance, and Cletus Yron-wood, handsome despite his lazy eye, always randy, always  laughing. Cletus had been Quentyn’s dearest friend for half his life, a brother in all but blood. “Give your  bride a kiss for me,” Cletus had whispered to him, just before he died.  The corsairs had come aboard in the darkness before the dawn, as the Meadowlark was  anchored off the coast of the Disputed Lands. The crew had beaten them off, at the cost of twelve lives.  Afterward the sailors stripped the dead corsairs of boots and belts and weapons, divvied up their purses,  and yanked gemstones from their ears and rings from their fingers. One of the corpses was so fat that  the ship’s cook had to cut his fingers off with a meat cleaver to claim his rings. It took three  Meadowlarks to roll the body into the sea. The other pirates were chucked in after him, without a word  of prayer or ceremony.  Their own dead received more tender treatment. The sailors sewed their bodies up in canvas,  weighed down with ballast stones so they might sink more quickly. The captain of the Meadowlark led  his crew in a prayer for the souls of their slain shipmates. Then he turned to his Dornish passengers, the  three who still remained of the six who had come aboard at the Planky Town. Even the big man had  emerged, pale and greensick and unsteady on his feet, struggling up from the depths of the ship’s hold  to pay his last respects. “One of you should say some words for your dead, before we give them to the  sea,” the captain said. Gerris had obliged, lying with every other word, since he dare not tell the truth of  who they’d been or why they’d come.  It was not supposed to end like that for them. “This will be a tale to tell our grandchildren,”  Cletus had declared the day they set out from his father’s castle. Will made a face at that, and said, “A  tale to tell tavern wenches, you mean, in hopes they’ll lift their skirts.” Cletus had slapped him on the  back. “For grandchildren, you need children. For children, you need to lift some skirts.” Later, in the  Planky Town, the Dornishmen had toasted Quentyn’s future bride, made ribald japes about his wedding  night to come, and talked about the things they’d see, the deeds they’d do, the glory they would win. All  they won was a sailcloth sack filled with ballast stones.  As much as he mourned Will and Cletus, it was the maester’s loss that Quentyn felt most keenly.  Kedry had been fluent in the tongues of all of the Free Cities, and even the mongrel Ghiscari that men   spoke along the shores of Slaver’s Bay. “Maester Kedry will accompany you,” his father said the night  they parted. “Heed his counsel. He has devoted half his life to the study of the Nine Free Cities.”  Quentyn wondered if things might not have gone a deal easier if only he were here to guide them.  “I would sell my mother for a bit of breeze,” said Gerris, as they rolled through the dockside  throngs. “It’s moist as the Maiden’s cunt, and still shy of noon. I hate this city.”  Quentyn shared the feeling. The sullen wet heat of Volantis sapped his strength and left him  feeling dirty. The worst part was knowing that nightfall would bring no relief. Up in the high meadows  north of Lord Yronwood’s estates, the air was always crisp and cool after dark, no matter how hot the  day had been. Not here. In Volantis, the nights were almost as hot as the days.  “The Goddess sails for New Ghis on the morrow,” Gerris reminded him. “That at least would  bring us closer.”  “New Ghis is an island, and a much smaller port than this. We would be closer, yes, but we could  find ourselves stranded. And New Ghis has allied with the Yunkai’i.” That news had not come as a  surprise to Quentyn. New Ghis and Yunkai were both Ghiscari cities. “If Volantis should ally with them as  well—”  “We need to find a ship from Westeros,” suggested Gerris, “some trader out of Lannisport or  Oldtown.”  “Few come this far, and those who do fill their holds with silk and spice from the Jade Sea, then  bend their oars for home.”  “Perhaps a Braavosi ship? One hears of purple sails as far away as Asshai and the islands of the  Jade Sea.”  “The Braavosi are descended from escaped slaves. They do not trade in Slaver’s Bay.”  “Do we have enough gold to buy a ship?”  “And who will sail her? You? Me?” Dornishmen had never been seafarers, not since Nymeria  burned her ten thousand ships. “The seas around Valyria are perilous, and thick with corsairs.”  “I have had enough of corsairs. Let’s not buy a ship.”  This is still just a game to him, Quentyn realized, no different than the time he led six of us up  into the mountains to find the old lair of the Vulture King. It was not in Gerris Drinkwater’s nature to  imagine they might fail, let alone that they might die. Even the deaths of three friends had not served to  chasten him, it would seem. He leaves that to me. He knows my nature is as cautious as his is bold.  “Perhaps the big man is right,” Ser Gerris said. “Piss on the sea, we can finish the journey  overland.”   “You know why he says that,” Quentyn said. “He’d rather die than set foot on another ship.” The  big man had been greensick every day of their voyage. In Lys, it had taken him four days to recover his  strength. They’d had to take rooms in an inn so Maester Kedry could tuck him into a feather bed and  feed him broths and potions until some pink returned to his cheeks.  It was possible to go overland to Meereen, that much was true. The old Valyrian roads would  take them there. Dragon roads, men called the great stone roadways of the Freehold, but the one that  ran eastward from Volantis to Meereen had earned a more sinister name: the demon road.  “The demon road is dangerous, and too slow,” Quentyn said. “Tywin Lannister will send his own  men after the queen once word of her reaches King’s Landing.” His father had been certain of that. “His  will come with knives. If they reach her first—”  “Let’s hope her dragons will sniff them out and eat them,” said Gerris. “Well, if we cannot find a  ship, and you will not let us ride, we had as well book passage back to Dorne.”  Crawl back to Sunspear defeated, with my tail between my legs? His father’s disappointment  would be more than Quentyn could bear, and the scorn of the Sand Snakes would be withering. Doran  Martell had put the fate of Dorne into his hands, he could not fail him, not whilst life remained.  Heat shimmers rose off the street as the hathay rattled and jounced along on its iron-rimmed  wheels, giving a dreamlike quality to their surroundings. In amongst the warehouses and the wharves,  shops and stalls of many sorts crowded the waterfront. Here fresh oysters could be bought, here iron  chains and manacles, here cyvasse pieces carved of ivory and jade. Here were temples too, where sailors  came to sacrifice to foreign gods, cheek by jowl with pillow houses where women called down from  balconies to men below. “Have a look at that one,” Gerris urged, as they passed one pillow house. “I  think she’s in love with you.”  And how much does a whore’s love cost? Truth be told, girls made Quentyn anxious, especially  the pretty ones.  When first he’d come to Yronwood, he had been smitten with Ynys, the eldest of Lord  Yronwood’s daughters. Though he never said a word about his feelings, he nursed his dreams for years  … until the day she was dispatched to wed Ser Ryon Allyrion, the heir to Godsgrace. The last time he had  seen her, she’d had one boy at her breast and another clinging to her skirts.  After Ynys had come the Drinkwater twins, a pair of tawny young maidens who loved hawking,  hunting, climbing rocks, and making Quentyn blush. One of them had given him his first kiss, though he  never knew which one. As daughters of a landed knight, the twins were too lowborn to marry, but  Cletus did not think that was any reason to stop kissing them. “After you’re wed you can take one of  them for a paramour. Or both, why not?” But Quentyn thought of several reasons why not, so he had  done his best to avoid the twins thereafter, and there had been no second kiss.  More recently, the youngest of Lord Yronwood’s daughters had taken to following him about  the castle. Gwyneth was but twelve, a small, scrawny girl whose dark eyes and brown hair set her apart   in that house of blue-eyed blondes. She was clever, though, as quick with words as with her hands, and  fond of telling Quentyn that he had to wait for her to flower, so she could marry him.  That was before Prince Doran had summoned him to the Water Gardens. And now the most  beautiful woman in the world was waiting in Meereen, and he meant to do his duty and claim her for his  bride. She will not refuse me. She will honor the agreement. Daenerys Targaryen would need Dorne to  win the Seven Kingdoms, and that meant that she would need him. It does not mean that she will love  me, though. She may not even like me.  The street curved where the river met the sea, and there along the bend a number of animal  sellers were clustered together, offering jeweled lizards, giant banded snakes, and agile little monkeys  with striped tails and clever pink hands. “Perhaps your silver queen would like a monkey,” said Gerris.  Quentyn had no idea what Daenerys Targaryen might like. He had promised his father that he  would bring her back to Dorne, but more and more he wondered if he was equal to the task.  I never asked for this, he thought.  Across the wide blue expanse of the Rhoyne, he could see the Black Wall that had been raised  by the Valyrians when Volantis was no more than an outpost of their empire: a great oval of fused stone  two hundred feet high and so thick that six four-horse chariots could race around its top abreast, as they  did each year to celebrate the founding of the city. Outlanders, foreigners, and freedmen were not  allowed inside the Black Wall save at the invitation of those who dwelt within, scions of the Old Blood  who could trace their ancestry back to Valyria itself.  The traffic was thicker here. They were near the western end of the Long Bridge, which linked  the two halves of the city. Wayns and carts and hathays crowded the streets, all of them coming from  the bridge or making for it. Slaves were everywhere, as numerous as roaches, scurrying about their  masters’ business.  Not far from Fishermonger’s Square and the Merchant’s House, shouts erupted from a cross  street, and a dozen Unsullied spearmen in ornate armor and tiger-skin cloaks appeared as if from  nowhere, waving everyone aside so the triarch could pass through atop his elephant. The triarch’s  elephant was a grey-skinned behemoth clad in elaborate enameled armor that clattered softly as he  moved, the castle on its back so tall that it scraped the top of the ornamental stone arch he was passing  underneath. “The triarchs are considered so elevated that their feet are not allowed to touch the  ground during their year of service,” Quentyn informed his companion. “They ride everywhere on  elephants.”  “Blocking up the streets and leaving heaps of dung for the likes of us to contend with,” said  Gerris. “Why Volantis needs three princes when Dorne makes do with one, I will never know.”  “The triarchs are neither kings nor princes. Volantis is a freehold, like Valyria of old. All freeborn  landholders share the rule. Even women are allowed to vote, provided they own land. The three triarchs  are chosen from amongst those noble families who can prove unbroken descent from old Valyria, to   serve until the first day of the new year. And you would know all this if you had troubled to read the  book that Maester Kedry gave you.”  “It had no pictures.”  “There were maps.”  “Maps do not count. If he had told me it was about tigers and elephants, I might have given it a  try. It looked suspiciously like a history.”  When their hathay reached the edge of the Fishermonger’s Square, their elephant lifted her  trunk and made a honking noise like some huge white goose, reluctant to plunge into the tangle of  wayns, palanquins, and foot traffic ahead. Their driver prodded her with his heel and kept her moving.  The fishmongers were out in strength, crying the morning catch. Quentyn understood one word  in two at best, but he did not need to know the words to know the fish. He saw cod and sailfish and  sardines, barrels of mussels and clams. Eels hung along the front of one stall. Another displayed a  gigantic turtle, strung up by its legs on iron chains, heavy as a horse. Crabs scrabbled inside casks of  brine and seaweed. Several of the vendors were frying chunks of fish with onions and beets, or selling  peppery fish stew out of small iron kettles.  In the center of the square, under the cracked and headless statue of a dead triarch, a crowd  had begun to gather about some dwarfs putting on a show. The little men were done up in wooden  armor, miniature knights preparing for a joust. Quentyn saw one mount a dog, as the other hopped onto  a pig … only to slide right off again, to a smattering of laughter.  “They look amusing,” Gerris said. “Shall we stop and watch them fight? A laugh might serve you  well, Quent. You look like an old man who has not moved his bowels in half a year.”  I am eight-and-ten, six years younger than you, Quentyn thought. I am no old man. Instead he  said, “I have no need for comic dwarfs. Unless they have a ship.”  “A small one, I would think.”  Four stories tall, the Merchant’s House dominated the docks and wharves and storehouses that  surrounded it. Here traders from Oldtown and King’s Landing mingled with their counterparts from  Braavos and Pentos and Myr, with hairy Ibbenese, pale-skinned voyagers from Qarth, coal-black  Summer Islanders in feathered cloaks, even masked shadow-binders from Asshai by the Shadow.  The paving stones felt warm beneath his feet when Quentyn climbed down from the hathay,  even through the leather of his boots. Outside the Merchant’s House a trestle table had been set up in  the shade and decorated with striped blue-and-white pennons that fluttered at every breath of air. Four  hard-eyed sellswords lounged around the table, calling out to every passing man and boy. Windblown,  Quentyn knew. The serjeants were looking for fresh meat to fill their ranks before they sailed for   Slaver’s Bay. And every man who signs with them is another sword for Yunkai, another blade meant to  drink the blood of my bride-to-be.  One of the Windblown shouted at them. “I do not speak your tongue,” Quentyn answered.  Though he could read and write High Valyrian, he had little practice speaking it. And the Volantene  apple had rolled a fair distance from the Valyrian tree.  “Westerosi?” the man answered, in the Common Tongue. “Dornishmen. My master is a  wineseller.”  “Master? Fuck that. Are you a slave? Come with us and be your own master. Do you want to die  abed? We’ll teach you sword and spear. You’ll ride to battle with the Tattered Prince and come home  richer than a lord. Boys, girls, gold, whatever you want, if you’re man enough to take it. We’re the  Windblown, and we fuck the goddess slaughter up her arse.”  Two of the sellswords began to sing, bellowing out the words to some marching song. Quentyn  understood enough to get the gist. We are the Windblown, they sang. Blow us east to Slaver’s Bay, we’ll  kill the butcher king and fuck the dragon queen.  “If Cletus and Will were still with us, we could come back with the big man and kill the lot of  them,” said Gerris.  Cletus and Will are dead. “Pay them no mind,” Quentyn said. The sellswords threw taunts at  their backs as they pushed through the doors of the Merchant’s House, mocking them as bloodless  cravens and frightened girls.  The big man was waiting in their rooms on the second floor. Though the inn had come well  recommended by the master of the Meadowlark, that did not mean Quentyn was willing to leave their  goods and gold unguarded. Every port had thieves, rats, and whores, and Volantis had more than most.  “I was about to go out looking for you,” Ser Archibald Yronwood said as he slid the bar back to  admit them. It was his cousin Cletus who had started calling him the big man, but the name was well  deserved. Arch was six-and-a-half-feet tall, broad of shoulder, huge of belly, with legs like tree trunks,  hands the size of hams, and no neck to speak of. Some childhood malady had made all his hair fall out.  His bald head reminded Quentyn of a smooth pink boulder. “So,” he demanded, “what did the smuggler  say? Do we have a boat?”  “A ship,” corrected Quentyn. “Aye, he’ll take us, but only as far as the nearest hell.”  Gerris sat upon a sagging bed and pulled off his boots. “Dorne is sounding more attractive every  moment.”  The big man said, “I still say we would do better to ride the demon road. Might be it’s not as  perilous as men say. And if it is, that only means more glory for those who dare it. Who would dare  molest us? Drink with his sword, me with my hammer, that’s more than any demon could digest.”   “And if Daenerys is dead before we reach her?” Quentyn said. “We must have a ship. Even if it is  Adventure.”  Gerris laughed. “You must be more desperate for Daenerys than I knew if you’d endure that  stench for months on end. After three days, I’d be begging them to murder me. No, my prince, I pray  you, not Adventure.”  “Do you have a better way?” Quentyn asked him. “I do. It’s just now come to me. It has its risks,  and it is not what you would call honorable, I grant you … but it will get you to your queen quicker than  the demon road.”  “Tell me,” said Quentyn Martell.  He woke alone, and found the litter halted.  A pile of crushed cushions remained to show where Illyrio had sprawled. The dwarf’s throat felt  dry and raspy. He had dreamed … what had he dreamed? He did not remember.  Outside, voices were speaking in a tongue he did not know. Tyrion swung his legs through the  curtains and hopped to the ground, to find Magister Illyrio standing by the horses with two riders  looming over him. Both wore shirts of worn leather beneath cloaks of dark brown wool, but their swords  were sheathed and the fat man did not look to be in danger.  “I need a piss,” the dwarf announced. He waddled off the road, undid his breeches, and relieved  himself into a tangle of thorns. It took quite a long time.  “He pisses well, at least,” a voice observed.  Tyrion flicked the last drops off and tucked himself away. “Pissing is the least of my talents. You  ought to see me shit.” He turned to Magister Illyrio. “Are these two known to you, magister? They look  like outlaws. Should I find my axe?”  “Your axe?” exclaimed the larger of the riders, a brawny man with a shaggy beard and a shock of  orange hair. “Did you hear that, Haldon? The little man wants to fight with us!”  His companion was older, clean-shaved, with a lined ascetic face. His hair had been pulled back  and tied in a knot behind his head. “Small men oft feel a need to prove their courage with unseemly  boasts,” he declared. “I doubt if he could kill a duck.”  Tyrion shrugged. “Fetch the duck.”  “If you insist.” The rider glanced at his companion.  The brawny man unsheathed a bastard sword. “I’m Duck, you mouthy little pisspot.”  Oh, gods be good. “I had a smaller duck in mind.”  The big man roared with laughter. “Did you hear, Haldon? He wants a smaller Duck!”   “I should gladly settle for a quieter one.” The man called Haldon studied Tyrion with cool grey  eyes before turning back to Illyrio. “You have some chests for us?”  “And mules to carry them.”  “Mules are too slow. We have pack horses, we’ll shift the chests to them. Duck, attend to that.”  “Why is it always Duck who attends to things?” The big man slipped his sword back in its sheath.  “What do you attend to, Haldon? Who is the knight here, you or me?” Yet he stomped off toward the  baggage mules all the same.  “How fares our lad?” asked Illyrio as the chests were being secured. Tyrion counted six, oaken  chests with iron hasps. Duck shifted them easily enough, hoisting them on one shoulder.  “He is as tall as Griff now. Three days ago he knocked Duck into a horse trough.”  “I wasn’t knocked. I fell in just to make him laugh.”  “Your ploy was a success,” said Haldon. “I laughed myself.”  “There is a gift for the boy in one of the chests. Some candied ginger. He was always fond of it.”  Illyrio sounded oddly sad. “I thought I might continue on to Ghoyan Drohe with you. A farewell feast  before you start downriver …”  “We have no time for feasts, my lord,” said Haldon. “Griff means to strike downriver the instant  we are back. News has been coming upriver, none of it good. Dothraki have been seen north of Dagger  Lake, outriders from old Motho’s khalasar, and Khal Zekko is not far behind him, moving through the  Forest of Qohor.”  The fat man made a rude noise. “Zekko visits Qohor every three or four years. The Qohorik give  him a sack of gold and he turns east again. As for Motho, his men are near as old as he is, and there are  fewer every year. The threat is—”  “—Khal Pono,” Haldon finished. “Motho and Zekko flee from him, if the tales are true. The last  reports had Pono near the headwaters of the Selhoru with a khalasar of thirty thousand. Griff does not  want to risk being caught up in the crossing if Pono should decide to risk the Rhoyne.” Haldon glanced at  Tyrion. “Does your dwarf ride as well as he pisses?”  “He rides,” Tyrion broke in, before the lord of cheese could answer for him, “though he rides  best with a special saddle and a horse that he knows well. He talks as well.”  “So he does. I am Haldon, the healer in our little band of brothers. Some call me Halfmaester.  My companion is Ser Duck.”  “Ser Rolly,” said the big man. “Rolly Duckfield. Any knight can make a knight, and Griff made me.  And you, dwarf?”   Illyrio spoke up quickly. “Yollo, he is called.”  Yollo? Yollo sounds like something you might name a monkey. Worse, it was a Pentoshi name,  and any fool could see that Tyrion was no Pentoshi. “In Pentos I am Yollo,” he said quickly, to make what  amends he could, “but my mother named me Hugor Hill.”  “Are you a little king or a little bastard?” asked Haldon.  Tyrion realized he would do well to be careful around Haldon Half-maester. “Every dwarf is a  bastard in his father’s eyes.”  “No doubt. Well, Hugor Hill, answer me this. How did Serwyn of the Mirror Shield slay the  dragon Urrax?”  “He approached behind his shield. Urrax saw only his own reflection until Serwyn had plunged  his spear through his eye.”  Haldon was unimpressed. “Even Duck knows that tale. Can you tell me the name of the knight  who tried the same ploy with Vhagar during the Dance of the Dragons?”  Tyrion grinned. “Ser Byron Swann. He was roasted for his trouble … only the dragon was Syrax,  not Vhagar.”  “I fear that you’re mistaken. In The Dance of the Dragons, A True Telling, Maester Munkun  writes—”  “—that it was Vhagar. Grand Maester Munkun errs. Ser Byron’s squire saw his master die, and  wrote his daughter of the manner of it. His account says it was Syrax, Rhaenyra’s she-dragon, which  makes more sense than Munken’s version. Swann was the son of a marcher lord, and Storm’s End was  for Aegon. Vhagar was ridden by Prince Aemond, Aegon’s brother. Why should Swann want to slay  her?”  Haldon pursed his lips. “Try not to tumble off the horse. If you do, best waddle back to Pentos.  Our shy maid will not wait for man nor dwarf.”  “Shy maids are my favorite sort. Aside from wanton ones. Tell me, where do whores go?”  “Do I look like a man who frequents whores?”  Duck laughed derisively. “He don’t dare. Lemore would make him pray for pardon, the lad would  want to come along, and Griff might cut his cock off and stuff it down his throat.”  “Well,” said Tyrion, “a maester does not need a cock.”  “Haldon’s only half a maester, though.”   “You seem to find the dwarf amusing, Duck,” said Haldon. “He can ride with you.” He wheeled  his mount about.  It took another few moments for Duck to finish securing Illyrio’s chests to the three pack horses.  By that time Haldon had vanished. Duck seemed unconcerned. He swung into the saddle, grabbed  Tyrion by the collar, and hoisted the little man up in front of him. “Hold tight to the pommel and you’ll  do fine. The mare’s got a nice sweet gait, and the dragon road’s smooth as a maiden’s arse.” Gathering  the reins in his right hand and the leads in his left, Ser Rolly set off at a brisk trot.  “Good fortune,” Illyrio called after them. “Tell the boy I am sorry that I will not be with him for  his wedding. I will rejoin you in Westeros. That I swear, by my sweet Serra’s hands.”  The last that Tyrion Lannister saw of Illyrio Mopatis, the magister was standing by his litter in his  brocade robes, his massive shoulders slumped. As his figure dwindled in their dust, the lord of cheese  looked almost small.  Duck caught up with Haldon Halfmaester a quarter mile on. Thereafter the riders continued side  by side. Tyrion clung to the high pommel with his short legs splayed out awkwardly, knowing he could  look forward to blisters, cramps, and saddle sores.  “I wonder what the pirates of Dagger Lake will make of our dwarf?” Haldon said as they rode on.  “Dwarf stew?” suggested Duck. “Urho the Unwashed is the worst of them,” Haldon confided.  “His stench alone is enough to kill a man.”  Tyrion shrugged. “Fortunately, I have no nose.”  Haldon gave him a thin smile. “If we should encounter the Lady Korra on Hag’s Teeth, you may  soon be lacking other parts as well. Korra the Cruel, they call her. Her ship is crewed by beautiful young  maids who geld every male they capture.”  “Terrifying. I may well piss my breeches.”  “Best not,” Duck warned darkly. “As you say. If we encounter this Lady Korra, I will just slip into  a skirt and say that I am Cersei, the famous bearded beauty of King’s Landing.”  This time Duck laughed, and Haldon said, “What a droll little fellow you are, Yollo. They say that  the Shrouded Lord will grant a boon to any man who can make him laugh. Perhaps His Grey Grace will  choose you to ornament his stony court.”  Duck glanced at his companion uneasily. “It’s not good to jape of that one, not when we’re so  near the Rhoyne. He hears.”  “Wisdom from a duck,” said Haldon. “I beg your pardon, Yollo. You need not look so pale, I was  only playing with you. The Prince of Sorrows does not bestow his grey kiss lightly.”   His grey kiss. The thought made his flesh crawl. Death had lost its terror for Tyrion Lannister, but  greyscale was another matter. The Shrouded Lord is just a legend, he told himself, no more real than the  ghost of Lann the Clever that some claim haunts Casterly Rock. Even so, he held his tongue.  The dwarf’s sudden silence went unnoticed, as Duck had begun to regale him with his own life  story. His father had been an armorer at Bitterbridge, he said, so he had been born with the sound of  steel ringing in his ears and had taken to swordplay at an early age. Such a large and likely lad drew the  eye of old Lord Caswell, who offered him a place in his garrison, but the boy had wanted more. He  watched Caswell’s weakling son named a page, a squire, and finally a knight. “A weedy pinch-faced  sneak, he was, but the old lord had four daughters and only the one son, so no one was allowed to say a  word against him. T’other squires hardly dared to lay a finger on him in the yard.”  “You were not so timid, though.” Tyrion could see where this tale was going easily enough.  “My father made a longsword for me to mark my sixteenth nameday,” said Duck, “but Lorent  liked the look of it so much he took it for himself, and my bloody father never dared to tell him no.  When I complained, Lorent told me to my face that my hand was made to hold a hammer, not a sword.  So I went and got a hammer and beat him with it, till both his arms and half his ribs were broken. After  that I had to leave the Reach, quick as it were. I made it across the water to the Golden Company. I did  some smithing for a few years as a ’prentice, then Ser Harry Strickland took me on as squire. When Griff  sent word downriver that he needed someone to help train his son to arms, Harry sent him me.”  “And Griff knighted you?”  “A year later.”  Haldon Halfmaester smiled a thin smile. “Tell our little friend how you came by your name, why  don’t you?”  “A knight needs more than just the one name,” the big man insisted,  “and, well, we were in a field when he dubbed me, and I looked up and saw these ducks, so …  don’t laugh, now.”  Just after sunset, they left the road to rest in an overgrown yard beside an old stone well. Tyrion  hopped down to work the cramps out of his calves whilst Duck and Haldon were watering the horses.  Tough brown grass and weed trees sprouted from the gaps between the cobbles, and the mossy walls of  what once might have been a huge stone manse. After the animals had been tended to, the riders  shared a simple supper of salt pork and cold white beans, washed down with ale. Tyrion found the plain  fare a pleasant change from all the rich food he had eaten with Illyrio. “Those chests we brought you,”  he said as they were chewing. “Gold for the Golden Company, I thought at first, until I saw Ser Rolly  hoist a chest onto one shoulder. If it were full of coin, he could never have lifted it so easily.”   “It’s just armor,” said Duck, with a shrug. “Clothing as well,” Haldon broke in. “Court clothes, for  all our party. Fine woolens, velvets, silken cloaks. One does not come before a queen looking shabby …  nor empty-handed. The magister has been kind enough to provide us with suitable gifts.”  Come moonrise, they were back in their saddles, trotting eastward under a mantle of stars. The  old Valyrian road glimmered ahead of them like a long silver ribbon winding through wood and dale. For  a little while Tyrion Lannister felt almost at peace. “Lomas Longstrider told it true. The road’s a wonder.”  “Lomas Longstrider?” asked Duck. “A scribe, long dead,” said Haldon. “He spent his life traveling  the world and writing about the lands he visited in two books he called Wonders and Wonders Made by  Man.”  “An uncle of mine gave them to me when I was just a boy,” said Tyrion. “I read them until they  fell to pieces.”  “The gods made seven wonders, and mortal man made nine,” quoted the Halfmaester. “Rather  impious of mortal man to do the gods two better, but there you are. The stone roads of Valyria were  one of Longstrider’s nine. The fifth, I believe.”  “The fourth,” said Tyrion, who had committed all sixteen of the wonders to memory as a boy.  His uncle Gerion liked to set him on the table during feasts and make him recite them. I liked that well  enough, didn’t I? Standing there amongst the trenchers with every eye upon me, proving what a clever  little imp I was. For years afterward, he had cherished a dream that one day he would travel the world  and see Longstrider’s wonders for himself.  Lord Tywin had put an end to that hope ten days before his dwarf son’s sixteenth nameday,  when Tyrion asked to tour the Nine Free Cities, as his uncles had done at that same age. “My brothers  could be relied upon to bring no shame upon House Lannister,” his father had replied. “Neither ever  wed a whore.” And when Tyrion had reminded him that in ten days he would be a man grown, free to  travel where he wished, Lord Tywin had said, “No man is free. Only children and fools think elsewise.  Go, by all means. Wear motley and stand upon your head to amuse the spice lords and the cheese kings.  Just see that you pay your own way and put aside any thoughts of returning.” At that the boy’s defiance  had crumbled. “If it is useful occupation you require, useful occupation you shall have,” his father then  said. So to mark his manhood, Tyrion was given charge of all the drains and cisterns within Casterly  Rock. Perhaps he hoped I’d fall into one. But Tywin had been disappointed in that. The drains never  drained half so well as when he had charge of them.  I need a cup of wine, to wash the taste of Tywin from my mouth. A skin of wine would serve me  even better.  They rode all night, with Tyrion sleeping fitfully, dozing against the pommel and waking  suddenly. From time to time he would begin to slip sideways from the saddle, but Ser Rolly would get a  hand on him and yank him upright once again. By dawn the dwarf’s legs were aching and his cheeks  were chafed and raw.   It was the next day before they reached the site of Ghoyan Drohe, hard beside the river. “The  fabled Rhoyne,” said Tyrion when he glimpsed the slow green waterway from atop a rise.  “The Little Rhoyne,” said Duck.  “It is that.” A pleasant enough river, I suppose, but the smallest fork of the Trident is twice as  wide, and all three of them run swifter. The city was no more impressive. Ghoyan Drohe had never been  large, Tyrion recalled from his histories, but it had been a fair place, green and flowering, a city of canals  and fountains. Until the war. Until the dragons came. A thousand years later, the canals were choked  with reeds and mud, and pools of stagnant water gave birth to swarms of flies. The broken stones of  temples and palaces were sinking back into the earth, and gnarled old willows grew thick along the  riverbanks.  A few people still remained amidst the squalor, tending little gardens in amongst the weeds. The  sound of iron hooves ringing on the old Valyrian road sent most of them darting back into the holes  they’d crawled from, but the bolder ones lingered in the sun long enough to stare at the passing riders  with dull, incurious eyes. One naked girl with mud up to her knees could not seem to take her eyes off  Tyrion. She has never seen a dwarf before, he realized, much less a dwarf without a nose. He made a  face and stuck his tongue out, and the girl began to cry.  “What did you do to her?” Duck asked.  “I blew her a kiss. All the girls cry when I kiss them.”  Beyond the tangled willows the road ended abruptly and they turned north for a short ways and  rode beside the water, until the brush gave way and they found themselves beside an old stone quay,  half-submerged and surrounded by tall brown weeds. “Duck!” came a shout. “Haldon!” Tyrion craned  his head to one side, and saw a boy standing on the roof of a low wooden building, waving a  wide-brimmed straw hat. He was a lithe and well-made youth, with a lanky build and a shock of dark  blue hair. The dwarf put his age at fifteen, sixteen, or near enough to make no matter.  The roof the boy was standing on turned out to be the cabin of the Shy Maid, an old ramshackle  single-masted poleboat. She had a broad beam and a shallow draft, ideal for making her way up the  smallest of streams and crabwalking over sandbars. A homely maid, thought Tyrion, but sometimes the  ugliest ones are the hungriest once abed. The poleboats that plied the rivers of Dorne were often  brightly painted and exquisitely carved, but not this maid. Her paintwork was a muddy greyish brown,  mottled and flaking; her big curved tiller, plain and unadorned. She looks like dirt, he thought, but no  doubt that’s the point.  Duck was hallooing back by then. The mare splashed through the shallows, trampling down the  reeds. The boy leapt down off the cabin roof to the poleboat’s deck, and the rest of the Shy Maid’s crew  made their appearance. An older couple with a Rhoynish cast to their features stood close beside the  tiller, whilst a handsome septa in a soft white robe stepped through the cabin door and pushed a lock of  dark brown hair from her eyes.   But there was no mistaking Griff. “That will be enough shouting,” he said. A sudden silence fell  upon the river.  This one will be trouble, Tyrion knew at once.  Griff’s cloak was made from the hide and head of a red wolf of the Rhoyne. Under the pelt he  wore brown leather stiffened with iron rings. His clean-shaved face was leathery too, with wrinkles at  the corners of his eyes. Though his hair was as blue as his son’s, he had red roots and redder eyebrows.  At his hip hung a sword and dagger. If he was happy to have Duck and Haldon back again, he hid it well,  but he did not trouble to conceal his displeasure at the sight of Tyrion. “A dwarf? What’s this?”  “I know, you were hoping for a wheel of cheese.” Tyrion turned to Young Griff and gave the lad  his most disarming smile. “Blue hair may serve you well in Tyrosh, but in Westeros children will throw  stones at you and girls will laugh in your face.”  The lad was taken aback. “My mother was a lady of Tyrosh. I dye my hair in memory of her.”  “What is this creature?” Griff demanded.  Haldon answered. “Illyrio sent a letter to explain.”  “I will have it, then. Take the dwarf to my cabin.”  I do not like his eyes, Tyrion reflected, when the sellsword sat down across from him in the  dimness of the boat’s interior, with a scarred plank table and a tallow candle between them. They were  ice blue, pale, cold. The dwarf misliked pale eyes. Lord Tywin’s eyes had been pale green and flecked  with gold.  He watched the sellsword read. That he could read said something all by itself. How many  sellswords could boast of that? He hardly moves his lips at all, Tyrion reflected.  Finally Griff looked up from the parchment, and those pale eyes narrowed. “Tywin Lannister  dead? At your hand?”  “At my finger. This one.” Tyrion held it up for Griff to admire. “Lord Tywin was sitting on a privy,  so I put a crossbow bolt through his bowels to see if he really did shit gold. He didn’t. A pity, I could have  used some gold. I also slew my mother, somewhat earlier. Oh, and my nephew Jof-frey, I poisoned him  at his wedding feast and watched him choke to death. Did the cheesemonger leave that part out? I  mean to add my brother and sister to the list before I’m done, if it please your queen.”  “Please her? Has Illyrio taken leave of his senses? Why does he imagine that Her Grace would  welcome the service of a self-confessed kingslayer and betrayer?”  A fair question, thought Tyrion, but what he said was, “The king I slew was sitting on her throne,  and all those I betrayed were lions, so it seems to me that I have already done the queen good service.”   He scratched the stump of his nose. “Have no fear, I won’t kill you, you are no kin of mine. Might I see  what the cheesemonger wrote? I do love to read about myself.”  Griff ignored the request. Instead he touched the letter to the candle flame and watched the  parchment blacken, curl, and flare up. “There is blood between Targaryen and Lannister. Why would you  support the cause of Queen Daenerys?”  “For gold and glory,” the dwarf said cheerfully. “Oh, and hate. If you had ever met my sister, you  would understand.”  “I understand hate well enough.” From the way Griff said the word, Tyrion knew that much was  true. He has supped on hate himself, this one. It has warmed him in the night for years.  “Then we have that in common, ser.”  “I am no knight.”  Not only a liar, but a bad one. That was clumsy and stupid, my lord. “And yet Ser Duck says you  knighted him.”  “Duck talks too much.”  “Some might wonder that a duck can talk at all. No matter, Griff. You are no knight and I am  Hugor Hill, a little monster. Your little monster, if you like. You have my word, all that I desire is to be leal  servant of your dragon queen.”  “And how do you propose to serve her?”  “With my tongue.” He licked his fingers, one by one. “I can tell Her Grace how my sweet sister  thinks, if you call it thinking. I can tell her captains the best way to defeat my brother, Jaime, in battle. I  know which lords are brave and which are craven, which are loyal and which are venal. I can deliver  allies to her. And I know much and more of dragons, as your halfmaester will tell you. I’m amusing too,  and I don’t eat much. Consider me your own true imp.”  Griff weighed that for a moment. “Understand this, dwarf. You are the last and least of our  company. Hold your tongue and do as you are told, or you will soon wish you had.”  Yes, Father, Tyrion almost said. “As you say, my lord.”  “I am no lord.”  Liar. “It was a courtesy, my friend.”  “I am not your friend either.”  No knight, no lord, no friend. “A pity.”   “Spare me your irony. I will take you as far as Volantis. If you show yourself to be obedient and  useful, you may remain with us, to serve the queen as best you can. Prove yourself more trouble than  you are worth, and you can go your own way.”  Aye, and my way will take me to the bottom of the Rhoyne with fish nibbling at what’s left of my  nose. “Valar dohaeris.”  “You may sleep on the deck or in the hold, as you prefer. Ysilla will find bedding for you.”  “How kind of her.” Tyrion made a waddling bow, but at the cabin door, he turned back. “What if  we should find the queen and discover that this talk of dragons was just some sailor’s drunken fancy?  This wide world is full of such mad tales. Grumkins and snarks, ghosts and ghouls, mermaids, rock  goblins, winged horses, winged pigs … winged lions.”  Griff stared at him, frowning. “I have given you fair warning, Lannister. Guard your tongue or  lose it. Kingdoms are at hazard here. Our lives, our names, our honor. This is no game we’re playing for  your amusement.”  Of course it is, thought Tyrion. The game of thrones. “As you say, Captain,” he murmured,  bowing once again.  For a long while he did not stir, but lay unmoving upon the heap of old sacks that served him for  a bed, listening to the wind in the lines, to the lapping of the river at the hull.  A full moon floated above the mast. It is following me downriver, watching me like some great  eye. Despite the warmth of the musty skins that covered him, a shiver went through the little man. I  need a cup of wine. A dozen cups of wine. But the moon would blink before that whoreson Griff let him   quench his thirst. Instead he drank water, and was condemned to sleepless nights and days of sweats  and shakes.  The dwarf sat up, cradling his head in his hands. Did I dream? All memory of it had fled. The  nights had never been kind to Tyrion Lannister. He slept badly even on soft feather beds. On the Shy  Maid, he made his bed atop the roof of the cabin, with a coil of hempen rope for a pillow. He liked it  better up here than in the boat’s cramped hold. The air was fresher, and the river sounds were sweeter  than Duck’s snoring. There was a price to be paid for such joys, though; the deck was hard, and he woke  stiff and sore, his legs cramped and aching.  They were throbbing now, his calves gone hard as wood. He kneaded them with his fingers,  trying to rub the ache away, but when he stood the pain was still enough to make him grimace. I need to  bathe. His boy’s clothes stank, and so did he. The others bathed in the river, but thus far he had not  joined them. Some of the turtles he’d seen in the shallows looked big enough to bite him in half.  Bonesnappers, Duck called them. Besides, he did not want Lemore to see him naked.  A wooden ladder led down from the cabin roof. Tyrion pulled on his boots and descended to the  afterdeck, where Griff sat wrapped in a wolf-skin cloak beside an iron brazier. The sellsword kept the  night watch by himself, rising as the rest of his band sought their beds and retiring when the sun came  up.  Tyrion squatted across from him and warmed his hands over the coals. Across the water  nightingales were singing. “Day soon,” he said to Griff.  “Not soon enough. We need to be under way.” If it had been up to Griff, the Shy Maid would  continue downstream by night as well as day, but Yandry and Ysilla refused to risk their poleboat in the  dark. The Upper Rhoyne was full of snags and sawyers, any one of which could rip out the Shy Maid’s  hull. Griff did not want to hear it. What he wanted was Volantis.  The sellsword’s eyes were always moving, searching the night for … what? Pirates? Stone men?  Slave-catchers? The river had perils, the dwarf knew, but Griff himself struck Tyrion as more dangerous  than any of them. He reminded Tyrion of Bronn, though Bronn had a sellsword’s black humor and Griff  had no humor at all.  “I would kill for a cup of wine,” muttered Tyrion.  Griff made no reply. You will die before you drink, his pale eyes seemed to say. Tyrion had drunk  himself blind his first night on the Shy Maid. The next day he awoke with dragons fighting in his skull.  Griff took one look at him retching over the side of the poleboat, and said, “You are done with drink.”  “Wine helps me sleep,” Tyrion had protested. Wine drowns my dreams, he might have said.  “Then stay awake,” Griff had replied, implacable.   To the east, the first pale light of day suffused the sky above the river. The waters of the Rhoyne  slowly went from black to blue, to match the sellsword’s hair and beard. Griff got to his feet. “The others  should wake soon. The deck is yours.” As the nightingales fell silent, the river larks took up their song.  Egrets splashed amongst the reeds and left their tracks across the sandbars. The clouds in the sky were  aglow: pink and purple, maroon and gold, pearl and saffron. One looked like a dragon. Once a man has  seen a dragon in flight, let him stay at home and tend his garden in content, someone had written once,  for this wide world has no greater wonder. Tyrion scratched at his scar and tried to recall the author’s  name. Dragons had been much in his thoughts of late.  “Good morrow, Hugor.” Septa Lemore had emerged in her white robes, cinched at the waist  with a woven belt of seven colors. Her hair flowed loose about her shoulders. “How did you sleep?”  “Fitfully, good lady. I dreamed of you again.” A waking dream. He could not sleep, so he had  eased a hand between his legs and imagined the septa atop him, breasts bouncing.  “A wicked dream, no doubt. You are a wicked man. Will you pray with me and ask forgiveness  for your sins?”  Only if we pray in the fashion of the Summer Isles. “No, but do give the Maiden a long, sweet kiss  for me.”  Laughing, the septa walked to the prow of the boat. It was her custom to bathe in the river  every morning. “Plainly, this boat was not named for you,” Tyrion called as she disrobed.  “The Mother and the Father made us in their image, Hugor. We should glory in our bodies, for  they are the work of gods.”  The gods must have been drunk when they got to me. The dwarf watched Lemore slip into the  water. The sight always made him hard. There was something wonderfully wicked about the thought of  peeling the septa out of those chaste white robes and spreading her legs. Innocence despoiled, he  thought … though Lemore was not near as innocent as she appeared. She had stretch marks on her belly  that could only have come from childbirth.  Yandry and Ysilla had risen with the sun and were going about their business. Yandry stole a  glance at Septa Lemore from time to time as he was checking the lines. His small dark wife, Ysilla, took  no notice. She fed some wood chips to the brazier on the afterdeck, stirred the coals with a blackened  blade, and began to knead the dough for the morning biscuits.  When Lemore climbed back onto the deck, Tyrion savored the sight of water trickling between  her breasts, her smooth skin glowing golden in the morning light. She was past forty, more handsome  than pretty, but still easy on the eye. Being randy is the next best thing to being drunk, he decided. It  made him feel as if he was still alive. “Did you see the turtle, Hugor?” the septa asked him, wringing  water from her hair. “The big ridgeback?”   The early morning was the best time for seeing turtles. During the day they would swim down  deep, or hide in cuts along the banks, but when the sun was newly risen they came to the surface. Some  liked to swim beside the boat. Tyrion had glimpsed a dozen different sorts: large turtles and small ones,  flatbacks and red-ears, softshells and bonesnappers, brown turtles, green turtles, black turtles, clawed  turtles and horned turtles, turtles whose ridged and patterned shells were covered with whorls of gold  and jade and cream. Some were so large they could have borne a man upon their backs. Yandry swore  the Rhoynar princes used to ride them across the river. He and his wife were Greenblood born, a pair of  Dornish orphans come home to Mother Rhoyne.  “I missed the ridgeback.” I was watching the naked woman. “I am sad for you.” Lemore slipped  her robe over her head. “I know you only rise so early in hopes of seeing turtles.”  “I like to watch the sun come up as well.” It was like watching a maiden rising naked from her  bath. Some might be prettier than others, but every one was full of promise. “The turtles have their  charms, I will allow. Nothing delights me so much as the sight of a nice pair of shapely … shells.”  Septa Lemore laughed. Like everyone else aboard the Shy Maid, she had her secrets. She was  welcome to them. I do not want to know her, I only want to fuck her. She knew it too. As she hung her  septa’s crystal about her neck, to nestle in the cleft between her breasts, she teased him with a smile.  Yandry pulled up the anchor, slid one of the long poles off the cabin roof, and pushed them off.  Two of the herons raised their heads to watch as the Shy Maid drifted away from the bank, out into the  current. Slowly the boat began to move downstream. Yandry went to the tiller. Ysilla was turning the  biscuits. She laid an iron pan atop the brazier and put the bacon in. Some days she cooked biscuits and  bacon; some days bacon and biscuits. Once every fortnight there might be a fish, but not today.  When Ysilla turned her back, Tyrion snatched a biscuit off the brazier, darting away just in time  to avoid a smack from her fearsome wooden spoon. They were best when eaten hot, dripping with  honey and butter. The smell of the bacon cooking soon fetched Duck up from the hold. He sniffed over  the brazier, received a swack from Ysilla’s spoon, and went back to have his morning piss off the stern.  Tyrion waddled over to join him. “Now here’s a sight to see,” he quipped as they were emptying  their bladders, “a dwarf and a duck, making the mighty Rhoyne that much mightier.”  Yandry snorted in derision. “Mother Rhoyne has no need of your water, Yollo. She is the  greatest river in the world.”  Tyrion shook off the last few drops. “Big enough to drown a dwarf, I grant you. The Mander is as  broad, though. So is the Trident, near its mouth. The Blackwater runs deeper.”  “You do not know the river. Wait, and you will see.”  The bacon turned crisp, the biscuits golden brown. Young Griff stumbled up onto deck yawning.  “Good morrow, all.” The lad was shorter than Duck, but his lanky build suggested that he had not yet  come into his full growth. This beardless boy could have any maiden in the Seven Kingdoms, blue hair or   no. Those eyes of his would melt them. Like his sire, Young Griff had blue eyes, but where the father’s  eyes were pale, the son’s were dark. By lamplight they turned black, and in the light of dusk they  seemed purple. His eyelashes were as long as any woman’s.  “I smell bacon,” the lad said, pulling on his boots. “Good bacon,” said Ysilla. “Sit.”  She fed them on the afterdeck, pressing honeyed biscuits on Young Griff and hitting Duck’s hand  with her spoon whenever he made a grab for more bacon. Tyrion pulled apart two biscuits, filled them  with bacon, and carried one to Yandry at the tiller. Afterward he helped Duck to raise the Shy Maid’s big  lateen sail. Yandry took them out into the center of the river, where the current was strongest. The Shy  Maid was a sweet boat. Her draft was so shallow she could work her way up even the smallest of the  river’s vassal streams, negotiating sandbars that would have stranded larger vessels, yet with her sail  raised and a current under her, she could make good speed. That could mean life and death on the  upper reaches of the Rhoyne, Yandry claimed. “There is no law above the Sorrows, not for a thousand  years.”  “And no people, so far as I can see.” He’d glimpsed some ruins along the banks, piles of masonry  overgrown by vines and moss and flowers, but no other signs of human habitation.  “You do not know the river, Yollo. A pirate boat may lurk up any stream, and escaped slaves oft  hide amongst the ruins. The slave-catchers seldom come so far north.”  “Slave-catchers would be a welcome change from turtles.” Not being an escaped slave, Tyrion  need not fear being caught. And no pirate was like to bother a poleboat moving downstream. The  valuable goods came up the river from Volantis.  When the bacon was gone, Duck punched Young Griff in the shoulder. “Time to raise some  bruises. Swords today, I think.”  “Swords?” Young Griff grinned. “Swords will be sweet.”  Tyrion helped him dress for the bout, in heavy breeches, padded doublet, and a dinted suit of  old steel plate. Ser Rolly shrugged into his mail and boiled leather. Both set helms upon their heads and  chose blunted longswords from the bundle in the weapons chest. They set to on the afterdeck, having at  each other lustily whilst the rest of the morning company looked on.  When they fought with mace or blunted longaxe, Ser Rolly’s greater size and strength would  quickly overwhelm his charge; with swords the contests were more even. Neither man had taken up a  shield this morning, so it was a game of slash and parry, back and forth across the deck. The river rang to  the sounds of their combat. Young Griff landed more blows, though Duck’s were harder. After a while,  the bigger man began to tire. His cuts came a little slower, a little lower. Young Griff turned them all and  launched a furious attack that forced Ser Rolly back. When they reached the stern, the lad tied up their  blades and slammed a shoulder into Duck, and the big man went into the river.   He came up sputtering and cursing, bellowing for someone to fish him out before a ’snapper ate  his privates. Tyrion tossed a line to him. “Ducks should swim better than that,” he said as he and Yandry  were hauling the knight back aboard the Shy Maid.  Ser Rolly grabbed Tyrion by the collar. “Let us see how dwarfs swim,” he said, chucking him  headlong into the Rhoyne.  The dwarf laughed last; he could paddle passably well, and did … until his legs began to cramp.  Young Griff extended him a pole. “You are not the first to try and drown me,” he told Duck, as he was  pouring river water from his boot. “My father threw me down a well the day I was born, but I was so  ugly that the water witch who lived down there spat me back.” He pulled off the other boot, then did a  cartwheel along the deck, spraying all of them.  Young Griff laughed. “Where did you learn that?”  “The mummers taught me,” he lied. “My mother loved me best of all her children because I was  so small. She nursed me at her breast till I was seven. That made my brothers jealous, so they stuffed  me in a sack and sold me to a mummer’s troupe. When I tried to run off the master mummer cut off half  my nose, so I had no choice but to go with them and learn to be amusing.”  The truth was rather different. His uncle had taught him a bit of tumbling when he was six or  seven. Tyrion had taken to it eagerly. For half a year he cartwheeled his merry way about Casterly Rock,  bringing smiles to the faces of septons, squires, and servants alike. Even Cersei laughed to see him once  or twice.  All that ended abruptly the day his father returned from a sojourn in King’s Landing. That night  at supper Tyrion surprised his sire by walking the length of the high table on his hands. Lord Tywin was  not pleased. “The gods made you a dwarf. Must you be a fool as well? You were born a lion, not a  monkey.”  And you’re a corpse, Father, so I’ll caper as I please. “You have a gift for making men smile,”  Septa Lemore told Tyrion as he was drying off his toes. “You should thank the Father Above. He gives  gifts to all his children.”  “He does,” he agreed pleasantly. And when I die, please let them bury with me a crossbow, so I  can thank the Father Above for his gifts the same way I thanked the father below.  His clothing was still soaked from his involuntary swim, clinging to his arms and legs  uncomfortably. Whilst Young Griff went off with Septa Lemore to be instructed in the mysteries of the  Faith, Tyrion stripped off the wet clothes and donned dry ones. Duck had a good guffaw when he  emerged on deck again. He could not blame him. Dressed as he was, he made a comic sight. His doublet  was divided down the middle; the left side was purple velvet with bronze studs; the right, yellow wool  embroidered in green floral patterns. His breeches were similarly split; the right leg was solid green, the  left leg striped in red and white. One of Illyrio’s chests had been packed with a child’s clothing, musty  but well made. Septa Lemore had slit each garment apart, then sewn them back together, joining half of   this to half of that to fashion a crude motley. Griff had even insisted that Tyrion help with the cutting  and sewing. No doubt he meant for it to be humbling, but Tyrion enjoyed the needlework. Lemore was  always pleasant company, despite her penchant for scolding him whenever he said something rude  about the gods. If Griff wants to cast me as the fool, I’ll play the game. Somewhere, he knew, Lord Tywin  Lannister was horrified, and that took the sting from it.  His other duty was anything but foolish. Duck has his sword, I my quill and parchment. Griff had  commanded him to set down all he knew of dragonlore. The task was a formidable one, but the dwarf  labored at it every day, scratching away as best he could as he sat cross-legged on the cabin roof.  Tyrion had read much and more of dragons through the years. The greater part of those  accounts were idle tales and could not be relied on, and the books that Illyrio had provided them were  not the ones he might have wished for. What he really wanted was the complete text of The Fires of the  Freehold, Galendro’s history of Valyria. No complete copy was known to Westeros, however; even the  Citadel’s lacked twenty-seven scrolls. They must have a library in Old Volantis, surely. I may find a better  copy there, if I can find a way inside the Black Walls to the city’s heart.  He was less hopeful concerning Septon Barth’s Dragons, Wyrms, and Wyverns: Their Unnatural  History. Barth had been a blacksmith’s son who rose to be King’s Hand during the reign of Jaehaerys the  Conciliator. His enemies always claimed he was more sorcerer than septon. Baelor the Blessed had  ordered all Barth’s writings destroyed when he came to the Iron Throne. Ten years ago, Tyrion had read  a fragment of Unnatural History that had eluded the Blessed Baelor, but he doubted that any of Barth’s  work had found its way across the narrow sea. And of course there was even less chance of his coming  on the fragmentary, anonymous, blood-soaked tome sometimes called Blood and Fire and sometimes  The Death of Dragons, the only surviving copy of which was supposedly hidden away in a locked vault  beneath the Citadel.  When the Halfmaester appeared on deck, yawning, the dwarf was writing down what he  recalled concerning the mating habits of dragons, on which subject Barth, Munkun, and Thomax held  markedly divergent views. Haldon stalked to the stern to piss down at the sun where it shimmered on  the water, breaking apart with every puff of wind. “We should reach the junction with the Noyne by  evening, Yollo,” the Halfmaester called out.  Tyrion glanced up from his writing. “My name is Hugor. Yollo is hiding in my breeches. Shall I let  him out to play?”  “Best not. You might frighten the turtles.” Haldon’s smile was as sharp as the blade of a dagger.  “What did you tell me was the name of that street in Lannisport where you were born, Yollo?”  “It was an alley. It had no name.” Tyrion took a mordant pleasure in inventing the details of the  colorful life of Hugor Hill, also known as Yollo, a bastard out of Lannisport. The best lies are seasoned  with a bit of truth. The dwarf knew he sounded like a westerman, and a highborn westerman at that, so  Hugor must needs be some lordling’s by-blow. Born in Lannisport because he knew that city better than  Oldtown or King’s Landing, and cities were where most dwarfs ended up, even those whelped by   Goodwife Bumpkin in the turnip patch. The countryside had no grotes-queries or mummer shows …  though it did have wells aplenty, to swallow up unwanted kittens, three-headed calves, and babes like  him.  “I see you have been defacing more good parchment, Yollo.” Haldon laced up his breeches.  “Not all of us can be half a maester.” Tyrion’s hand was cramping. He put his quill aside and  flexed his stubby fingers. “Fancy another game of cyvasse?” The Halfmaester always defeated him, but it  was a way to pass the time.  “This evening. Will you join us for Young Griff’s lesson?”  “Why not? Someone needs to correct your errors.”  There were four cabins on the Shy Maid. Yandry and Ysilla shared one,  Griff and Young Griff another. Septa Lemore had a cabin to herself, as did Haldon. The  Halfmaester’s cabin was the largest of the four. One wall was lined with bookshelves and bins stacked  with old scrolls and parchments; another held racks of ointments, herbs, and potions. Golden light  slanted through the wavy yellow glass of the round window. The furnishings included a bunk, a writing  desk, a chair, a stool, and the Halfmaester’s cyvasse table, strewn with carved wooden pieces.  The lesson began with languages. Young Griff spoke the Common Tongue as if he had been born  to it, and was fluent in High Valyrian, the low dialects of Pentos, Tyrosh, Myr, and Lys, and the trade talk  of sailors. The Volantene dialect was as new to him as it was to Tyrion, so every day they learned a few  more words whilst Haldon corrected their mistakes. Meereenese was harder; its roots were Valyrian as  well, but the tree had been grafted onto the harsh, ugly tongue of Old Ghis. “You need a bee up your  nose to speak Ghiscari properly,” Tyrion complained. Young Griff laughed, but the Halfmaester only said,  “Again.” The boy obeyed, though he rolled his eyes along with his zzzs this time. He has a better ear than  me, Tyrion was forced to admit, though I’ll wager my tongue is still more nimble.  Geometry followed languages. There the boy was less adroit, but Haldon was a patient teacher,  and Tyrion was able to make himself of use as well. He had learned the mysteries of squares and circles  and triangles from his father’s maesters at Casterly Rock, and they came back more quickly than he  would have thought.  By the time they turned to history, Young Griff was growing restive. “We were discussing the  history of Volantis,” Haldon said to him. “Can you tell Yollo the difference between a tiger and an  elephant?”  “Volantis is the oldest of the Nine Free Cities, first daughter of Valyria,” the lad replied, in a  bored tone. “After the Doom it pleased the Volantenes to consider themselves the heirs of the Freehold  and rightful rulers of the world, but they were divided as to how dominion might best be achieved. The  Old Blood favored the sword, while the merchants and moneylenders advocated trade. As they  contended for rule of the city, the factions became known as the tigers and elephants, respectively.   “The tigers held sway for almost a century after the Doom of Valyria. For a time they were  successful. A Volantene fleet took Lys and a Volantene army captured Myr, and for two generations all  three cities were ruled from within the Black Walls. That ended when the tigers tried to swallow Tyrosh.  Pentos came into the war on the Tyroshi side, along with the Westerosi Storm King. Braavos provided a  Lyseni exile with a hundred warships, Aegon Targaryen flew forth from Dragonstone on the Black Dread,  and Myr and Lys rose up in rebellion. The war left the Disputed Lands a waste, and freed Lys and Myr  from the yoke. The tigers suffered other defeats as well. The fleet they sent to reclaim Valyria vanished  in the Smoking Sea. Qohor and Norvos broke their power on the Rhoyne when the fire galleys fought on  Dagger Lake. Out of the east came the Dothraki, driving smallfolk from their hovels and nobles from  their estates, until only grass and ruins remained from the forest of Qohor to the headwaters of the  Selhoru. After a century of war, Volantis found herself broken, bankrupt, and depopulated. It was then  that the elephants rose up. They have held sway ever since. Some years the tigers elect a triarch, and  some years they do not, but never more than one, so the elephants have ruled the city for three  hundred years.”  “Just so,” said Haldon. “And the present triarchs?”  “Malaquo is a tiger, Nyessos and Doniphos are elephants.”  “And what lesson can we draw from Volantene history?”  “If you want to conquer the world, you best have dragons.”  Tyrion could not help but laugh.  Later, when Young Griff went up on deck to help Yandry with the sails and poles, Haldon set up  his cyvasse table for their game. Tyrion watched with mismatched eyes, and said, “The boy is bright. You  have done well by him. Half the lords in Westeros are not so learned, sad to say. Languages, history,  songs, sums … a heady stew for some sellsword’s son.”  “A book can be as dangerous as a sword in the right hands,” said Haldon. “Try to give me a  better battle this time, Yollo. You play cyvasse as badly as you tumble.”  “I am trying to lull you into a false sense of confidence,” said Tyrion, as they arranged their tiles  on either side of a carved wooden screen. “You think you taught me how to play, but things are not  always as they seem. Perhaps I learned the game from the cheesemonger, have you considered that?”  “Illyrio does not play cyvasse.”  No, thought the dwarf, he plays the game of thrones, and you and Griff and Duck are only pieces,  to be moved where he will and sacrificed at need, just as he sacrificed Viserys. “The blame must fall on  you, then. If I play badly, it is your doing.”  The Halfmaester chuckled. “Yollo, I shall miss you when the pirates cut your throat.”   “Where are these famous pirates? I am beginning to think that you and Illyrio made them all  up.”  “They are thickest on the stretch of river between Ar Noy and the Sorrows. Above the ruins of Ar  Noy, the Qohorik rule the river, and below the Sorrows the galleys of Volantis hold sway, but neither city  claims the waters in between, so the pirates have made it their own. Dagger Lake is full of islands where  they lurk in hidden caves and secret strongholds. Are you ready?”  “For you? Beyond a doubt. For the pirates? Less so.”  Haldon removed the screen. Each of them contemplated the other’s opening array. “You are  learning,” the Halfmaester said.  Tyrion almost grabbed his dragon but thought better of it. Last game he had brought her out too  soon and lost her to a trebuchet. “If we do meet these fabled pirates, I may join up with them. I’ll tell  them that my name is Hugor Halfmaester.” He moved his light horse toward Haldon’s mountains.  Haldon answered with an elephant. “Hugor Halfwit would suit you better.”  “I only need half my wits to be a match for you.” Tyrion moved up his heavy horse to support  the light. “Perhaps you would care to wager on the outcome?”  The Halfmaester arched an eyebrow. “How much?”  “I have no coin. We’ll play for secrets.”  “Griff would cut my tongue out.”  “Afraid, are you? I would be if I were you.”  “The day you defeat me at cyvasse will be the day turtles crawl out my arse.” The Halfmaester  moved his spears. “You have your wager, little man.”  Tyrion stretched a hand out for his dragon.  It was three hours later when the little man finally crept back up on deck to empty his bladder.  Duck was helping Yandry wrestle down the sail, while Ysilla took the tiller. The sun hung low above the  reed-beds along the western bank, as the wind began to gust and rip. I need that skin of wine, the dwarf  thought. His legs were cramped from squatting on that stool, and he felt so light-headed that he was  lucky not to fall into the river.  “Yollo,” Duck called. “Where’s Haldon?”  “He’s taken to his bed, in some discomfort. There are turtles crawling out his arse.” He left the  knight to sort that out and crawled up the ladder to the cabin roof. Off to the east, there was darkness  gathering behind a rocky island.   Septa Lemore found him there. “Can you feel the storms in the air, Hugor Hill? Dagger Lake is  ahead of us, where pirates prowl. And beyond that lie the Sorrows.”  Not mine. I carry mine own sorrows with me, everywhere I go. He thought of Tysha and  wondered where whores go. Why not Volantis? Perhaps I’ll find her there. A man should cling to hope.  He wondered what he would say to her. I am sorry that I let them rape you, love. I thought you were a  whore. Can you find it in your heart to forgive me? I want to go back to our cottage, to the way it was  when we were man and wife.  The island fell away behind them. Tyrion saw ruins rising along the eastern bank: crooked walls  and fallen towers, broken domes and rows of rotted wooden pillars, streets choked by mud and  overgrown with purple moss. Another dead city, ten times as large as Ghoyan Drohe. Turtles lived there  now, big bonesnappers. The dwarf could see them basking in the sun, brown and black hummocks with  jagged ridges down the center of their shells. A few saw the Shy Maid and slid down into the water,  leaving ripples in their wake. This would not be a good place for a swim.  Then, through the twisted half-drowned trees and wide wet streets, he glimpsed the silvery  sheen of sunlight upon water. Another river, he knew at once, rushing toward the Rhoyne. The ruins  grew taller as the land grew narrower, until the city ended on a point of land where stood the remains  of a colossal palace of pink and green marble, its collapsed domes and broken spires looming large  above a row of covered archways. Tyrion saw more ’snappers sleeping in the slips where half a hundred  ships might once have docked. He knew where he was then. That was Nymeria’s palace, and this is all  that remains of Ny Sar, her city.  “Yollo,” shouted Yandry as the Shy Maid passed the point, “tell me again of those Westerosi  rivers as big as Mother Rhoyne.”  “I did not know,” he called back. “No river in the Seven Kingdoms is half so wide as this.” The  new river that had joined them was a close twin to the one they had been sailing down, and that one  alone had almost matched the Mander or the Trident.  “This is Ny Sar, where the Mother gathers in her Wild Daughter, Noyne,” said Yandry, “but she  will not reach her widest point until she meets her other daughters. At Dagger Lake the Qhoyne comes  rushing in, the Darkling Daughter, full of gold and amber from the Axe and pine-cones from the Forest of  Qohor. South of there the Mother meets Lhorulu, the Smiling Daughter from the Golden Fields. Where  they join once stood Chroyane, the festival city, where the streets were made of water and the houses  made of gold. Then south and east again for long leagues, until at last comes creeping in Selhoru, the  Shy Daughter who hides her course in reeds and writhes. There Mother Rhoyne waxes so wide that a  man upon a boat in the center of the stream cannot see a shore to either side. You shall see, my little  friend.”  I shall, the dwarf was thinking, when he spied a rippling ahead not six yards from the boat. He  was about to point it out to Lemore when it came to the surface with a wash of water that rocked the  Shy Maid sideways.   It was another turtle, a horned turtle of enormous size, its dark green shell mottled with brown  and overgrown with water moss and crusty black river molluscs. It raised its head and bellowed, a  deep-throated thrumming roar louder than any warhorn that Tyrion had ever heard. “We are blessed,”  Ysilla was crying loudly, as tears streamed down her face. “We are blessed, we are blessed.”  Duck was hooting, and Young Griff too. Haldon came out on deck to learn the cause of the  commotion … but too late. The giant turtle had vanished below the water once again. “What was the  cause of all that noise?” the Halfmaester asked.  “A turtle,” said Tyrion. “A turtle bigger than this boat.”  “It was him,” cried Yandry. “The Old Man of the River.”  And why not? Tyrion grinned. Gods and wonders always appear, to attend the birth of kings.  The Shy Maid moved through the fog like a blind man groping his way down an unfamiliar hall.  Septa Lemore was praying. The mists muffled the sound of her voice, making it seem small and  hushed. Griff paced the deck, mail clinking softly beneath his wolfskin cloak. From time to time he  touched his sword, as if to make certain that it still hung at his side. Rolly Duckfield was pushing at the  starboard pole, Yandry at the larboard. Ysilla had the tiller.  “I do not like this place,” Haldon Halfmaester muttered. “Frightened of a little fog?” mocked  Tyrion, though in truth there was quite a lot of fog. At the prow of the Shy Maid, Young Griff stood with  the third pole, to push them away from hazards as they loomed up through the mists. The lanterns had  been lit fore and aft, but the fog was so thick that all the dwarf could see from amidships was a light  floating out ahead of him and another following behind. His own task was to tend the brazier and make  certain that the fire did not go out.  “This is no common fog, Hugor Hill,” Ysilla insisted. “It stinks of sorcery, as you would know if  you had a nose to smell it. Many a voyager has been lost here, poleboats and pirates and great river  galleys too. They wander forlorn through the mists, searching for a sun they cannot find until madness  or hunger claim their lives. There are restless spirits in the air here and tormented souls below the  water.”   “There’s one now,” said Tyrion. Off to starboard a hand large enough to crush the boat was  reaching up from the murky depths. Only the tops of two fingers broke the river’s surface, but as the Shy  Maid eased on past he could see the rest of the hand rippling below the water and a pale face looking  up. Though his tone was light, he was uneasy. This was a bad place, rank with despair and death. Ysilla is  not wrong. This fog is not natural. Something foul grew in the waters here, and festered in the air. Small  wonder the stone men go mad.  “You should not make mock,” warned Ysilla. “The whispering dead hate the warm and quick and  ever seek for more damned souls to join them.”  “I doubt they have a shroud my size.” The dwarf stirred the coals with a poker.  “Hatred does not stir the stone men half so much as hunger.” Haldon Halfmaester had wrapped  a yellow scarf around his mouth and nose, muffling his voice. “Nothing any sane man would want to eat  grows in these fogs. Thrice each year the triarchs of Volantis send a galley upriver with provisions, but  the mercy ships are oft late and sometimes bring more mouths than food.”  Young Griff said, “There must be fish in the river.”  “I would not eat any fish taken from these waters,” said Ysilla. “I would not.”  “We’d do well not to breathe the fog either,” said Haldon. “Garin’s Curse is all about us.”  The only way not to breathe the fog is not to breathe. “Garin’s Curse is only greyscale,” said  Tyrion. The curse was oft seen in children, especially in damp, cold climes. The afflicted flesh stiffened,  calcified, and cracked, though the dwarf had read that greyscale’s progress could be stayed by limes,  mustard poultices, and scalding-hot baths (the maesters said) or by prayer, sacrifice, and fasting (the  septons insisted). Then the disease passed, leaving its young victims disfigured but alive. Maesters and  sep-tons alike agreed that children marked by greyscale could never be touched by the rarer mortal  form of the affliction, nor by its terrible swift cousin, the grey plague. “Damp is said to be the culprit,” he  said. “Foul humors in the air. Not curses.”  “The conquerors did not believe either, Hugor Hill,” said Ysilla. “The men of Volantis and Valyria  hung Garin in a golden cage and made mock as he called upon his Mother to destroy them. But in the  night the waters rose and drowned them, and from that day to this they have not rested. They are down  there still beneath the water, they who were once the lords of fire. Their cold breath rises from the  murk to make these fogs, and their flesh has turned as stony as their hearts.”  The stump of Tyrion’s nose was itching fiercely. He gave it a scratch. The old woman may be  right. This place is no good. I feel as if I am back in the privy again, watching my father die. He would go  mad as well if he had to spend his days in this grey soup whilst his flesh and bones turned to stone.  Young Griff did not seem to share his misgivings. “Let them try and trouble us, we’ll show them  what we’re made of.”   “We are made of blood and bone, in the image of the Father and the Mother,” said Septa  Lemore. “Make no vainglorious boasts, I beg you. Pride is a grievous sin. The stone men were proud as  well, and the Shrouded Lord was proudest of them all.”  The heat from the glowing coals brought a flush to Tyrion’s face. “Is there a Shrouded Lord? Or  is he just some tale?”  “The Shrouded Lord has ruled these mists since Garin’s day,” said Yandry. “Some say that he  himself is Garin, risen from his watery grave.”  “The dead do not rise,” insisted Haldon Halfmaester, “and no man lives a thousand years. Yes,  there is a Shrouded Lord. There have been a score of them. When one dies another takes his place. This  one is a corsair from the Basilisk Islands who believed the Rhoyne would offer richer pickings than the  Summer Sea.”  “Aye, I’ve heard that too,” said Duck, “but there’s another tale I like better. The one that says  he’s not like t’other stone men, that he started as a statue till a grey woman came out of the fog and  kissed him with lips as cold as ice.”  “Enough,” said Griff. “Be quiet, all of you.”  Septa Lemore sucked in her breath. “What was that?”  “Where?” Tyrion saw nothing but the fog. “Something moved. I saw the water rippling.”  “A turtle,” the prince announced cheerfully. “A big ’snapper, that’s all it was.” He thrust his pole  out ahead of them and pushed them away from a towering green obelisk.  The fog clung to them, damp and chilly. A sunken temple loomed up out of the greyness as  Yandry and Duck leaned upon their poles and paced slowly from prow to stern, pushing. They passed a  marble stair that spiraled up from the mud and ended jaggedly in air. Beyond, half-seen, were other  shapes: shattered spires, headless statues, trees with roots bigger than their boat.  “This was the most beautiful city on the river, and the richest,” said Yandry. “Chroyane, the  festival city.”  Too rich, thought Tyrion, too beautiful. It is never wise to tempt the dragons. The drowned city  was all around them. A half-seen shape flapped by overhead, pale leathery wings beating at the fog. The  dwarf craned his head around to get a better look, but the thing was gone as suddenly as it had  appeared.  Not long after, another light floated into view. “Boat,” a voice called across the water, faintly.  “Who are you?”  “Shy Maid,” Yandry shouted back. “Kingfisher. Up or down?”  “Down. Hides and honey, ale and tallow.”   “Up. Knives and needles, lace and linen, spice wine.”  “What word from old Volantis?” Yandry called. “War,” the word came back. “Where?” Griff  shouted. “When?”  “When the year turns,” came the answer, “Nyessos and Malaquo go hand in hand, and the  elephants show stripes.” The voice faded as the other boat moved away from them. They watched its  light dwindle and disappear.  “Is it wise to shout through the fog at boats we cannot see?” asked Tyrion. “What if they were  pirates?” They had been fortunate where the pirates were concerned, slipping down Dagger Lake by  night, unseen and unmolested. Once Duck had caught a glimpse of a hull that he insisted belonged to  Urho the Unwashed. The Shy Maid had been upwind, however, and Urho—if Urho it had been—had  shown no interest in them.  “The pirates will not sail into the Sorrows,” said Yandry. “Elephants with stripes?” Griff  muttered. “What is that about? Nyessos and Malaquo? Illyrio has paid Triarch Nyessos enough to own  him eight times over.”  “In gold or cheese?” quipped Tyrion.  Griff rounded on him. “Unless you can cut this fog with your next witticism, keep it to yourself.”  Yes, Father, the dwarf almost said. I’ll be quiet. Thank you. He did not know these Volantenes,  yet it seemed to him that elephants and tigers might have good reason to make common cause when  faced with dragons. Might be the cheesemonger has misjudged the situation. You can buy a man with  gold, but only blood and steel will keep him true.  The little man stirred the coals again and blew on them to make them burn brighter. I hate this. I  hate this fog, I hate this place, and I am less than fond of Griff. Tyrion still had the poison mushrooms he  had plucked from the grounds of Illyrio’s manse, and there were days when he was sore tempted to slip  them into Griff’s supper. The trouble was, Griff scarce seemed to eat.  Duck and Yandry pushed against the poles. Ysilla turned the tiller. Young Griff pushed the Shy  Maid away from a broken tower whose windows stared down like blind black eyes. Overhead her sail  hung limp and heavy. The water deepened under her hull, until their poles could not touch bottom, but  still the current pushed them downstream, until …  All Tyrion could see was something massive rising from the river, humped and ominous. He took  it for a hill looming above a wooded island, or some colossal rock overgrown with moss and ferns and  hidden by the fog. As the Shy Maid drew nearer, though, the shape of it came clearer. A wooden keep  could be seen beside the water, rotted and overgrown. Slender spires took form above it, some of them  snapped off like broken spears. Roofless towers appeared and disappeared, thrusting blindly upward.  Halls and galleries drifted past: graceful buttresses, delicate arches, fluted columns, terraces and  bowers.   All ruined, all desolate, all fallen.  The grey moss grew thickly here, covering the fallen stones in great mounds and bearding all the  towers. Black vines crept in and out of windows, through doors and over archways, up the sides of high  stone walls. The fog concealed three-quarters of the palace, but what they glimpsed was more than  enough for Tyrion to know that this island fastness had been ten times the size of the Red Keep once  and a hundred times more beautiful. He knew where he was. “The Palace of Love,” he said softly.  “That was the Rhoynar name,” said Haldon Halfmaester, “but for a thousand years this has been  the Palace of Sorrow.”  The ruin was sad enough, but knowing what it had been made it even sadder. There was  laughter here once, Tyrion thought. There were gardens bright with flowers and fountains sparkling  golden in the sun. These steps once rang to the sound of lovers’ footsteps, and beneath that broken  dome marriages beyond count were sealed with a kiss. His thoughts turned to Tysha, who had so briefly  been his lady wife. It was Jaime, he thought, despairing. He was my own blood, my big strong brother.  When I was small he brought me toys, barrel hoops and blocks and a carved wooden lion. He gave me  my first pony and taught me how to ride him. When he said that he had bought you for me, I never  doubted him. Why would I? He was Jaime, and you were just some girl who’d played a part. I had feared  it from the start, from the moment you first smiled at me and let me touch your hand. My own father  could not love me. Why would you if not for gold?  Through the long grey fingers of the fog, he heard again the deep shuddering thrum of a  bowstring snapping taut, the grunt Lord Tywin made as the quarrel took him beneath the belly, the slap  of cheeks on stone as he sat back down to die. “Wherever whores go,” he said. And where is that?  Tyrion wanted to ask him. Where did Tysha go, Father? “How much more of this fog must we endure?”  “Another hour should see us clear of the Sorrows,” said Haldon Half-maester. “From there on,  this should be a pleasure cruise. There’s a village around every bend along the lower Rhoyne. Orchards  and vineyards and fields of grain ripening in the sun, fisherfolk on the water, hot baths and sweet wines.  Selhorys, Valysar, and Volon Therys are walled towns so large they would be cities in the Seven  Kingdoms. I believe I’ll—”  “Light ahead,” warned Young Griff.  Tyrion saw it too. Kingfisher, or another poleboat, he told himself, but somehow he knew that  was not right. His nose itched. He scratched at it savagely. The light grew brighter as the Shy Maid  approached it. A soft star in the distance, it glimmered faintly through the fog, beckoning them on.  Shortly it became two lights, then three: a ragged row of beacons rising from the water.  “The Bridge of Dream,” Griff named it. “There will be stone men on the span. Some may start to  wail at our approach, but they are not like to molest us. Most stone men are feeble creatures, clumsy,  lumbering, witless. Near the end they all go mad, but that is when they are most dangerous. If need be,  fend them off with the torches. On no account let them touch you.”   “They may not even see us,” said Haldon Halfmaester. “The fog will hide us from them until we  are almost at the bridge, and then we will be past before they know that we are here.”  Stone eyes are blind eyes, thought Tyrion. The mortal form of greyscale began in the extremities,  he knew: a tingling in a fingertip, a toenail turning black, a loss of feeling. As the numbness crept into the  hand, or stole past the foot and up the leg, the flesh stiffened and grew cold and the victim’s skin took  on a greyish hue, resembling stone. He had heard it said that there were three good cures for greyscale:  axe and sword and cleaver. Hacking off afflicted parts did sometimes stop the spread of the disease,  Tyrion knew, but not always. Many a man had sacrificed one arm or foot, only to find the other going  grey. Once that happened, hope was gone. Blindness was common when the stone reached the face. In  the final stages the curse turned inward, to muscles, bones, and inner organs.  Ahead of them, the bridge grew larger. The Bridge of Dream, Griff called it, but this dream was  smashed and broken. Pale stone arches marched off into the fog, reaching from the Palace of Sorrow to  the river’s western bank. Half of them had collapsed, pulled down by the weight of the grey moss that  draped them and the thick black vines that snaked upward from the water. The broad wooden span of  the bridge had rotted through, but some of the lamps that lined the way were still aglow. As the Shy  Maid drew closer, Tyrion could see the shapes of stone men moving in the light, shuffling aimlessly  around the lamps like slow grey moths. Some were naked, others clad in shrouds.  Griff drew his longsword. “Yollo, light the torches. Lad, take Lemore back to her cabin and stay  with her.”  Young Griff gave his father a stubborn look. “Lemore knows where her cabin is. I want to stay.”  “We are sworn to protect you,” Lemore said softly. “I don’t need to be protected. I can use a  sword as well as Duck. I’m half a knight.”  “And half a boy,” said Griff. “Do as you are told. Now.”  The youth cursed under his breath and flung his pole down onto the deck. The sound echoed  queerly in the fog, and for a moment it was as if poles were falling around them. “Why should I run and  hide? Haldon is staying, and Ysilla. Even Hugor.”  “Aye,” said Tyrion, “but I’m small enough to hide behind a duck.” He thrust half a dozen torches  into the brazier’s glowing coals and watched the oiled rags flare up. Don’t stare at the fire, he told  himself. The flames would leave him night blind.  “You’re a dwarf,” Young Griff said scornfully. “My secret is revealed,” Tyrion agreed. “Aye, I’m  less than half of Haldon, and no one gives a mummer’s fart whether I live or die.” Least of all me. “You,  though … you are everything.”  “Dwarf,” said Griff, “I warned you—”  A wail came shivering through the fog, faint and high.   Lemore whirled, trembling. “Seven save us all.”  The broken bridge was a bare five yards ahead. Around its piers, the water rippled white as the  foam from a madman’s mouth. Forty feet above, the stone men moaned and muttered beneath a  flickering lamp. Most took no more notice of the Shy Maid than of a drifting log. Tyrion clutched his  torch tighter and found that he was holding his breath. And then they were beneath the bridge, white  walls heavy with curtains of grey fungus looming to either side, water foaming angrily around them. For  a moment it looked as though they might crash into the right-hand pier, but Duck raised his pole and  shoved off, back into the center of the channel, and a few heartbeats later they were clear.  Tyrion had no sooner exhaled than Young Griff grabbed hold of his arm. “What do you mean? I  am everything? What did you mean by that? Why am I everything?”  “Why,” said Tyrion, “if the stone men had taken Yandry or Griff or our lovely Lemore, we would  have grieved for them and gone on. Lose you, and this whole enterprise is undone, and all those years of  feverish plotting by the cheesemonger and the eunuch will have been for naught … isn’t that so?”  The boy looked to Griff. “He knows who I am.”  If I did not know before, I would now. By then the Shy Maid was well downstream of the Bridge  of Dream. All that remained was a dwindling light astern, and soon enough that would be gone as well.  “You’re Young Griff, son of Griff the sellsword,” said Tyrion. “Or perhaps you are the Warrior in mortal  guise. Let me take a closer look.” He held up his torch, so that the light washed over Young Griff’s face.  “Leave off,” Griff commanded, “or you will wish you had.”  The dwarf ignored him. “The blue hair makes your eyes seem blue, that’s good. And the tale of  how you color it in honor of your dead Tyroshi mother was so touching it almost made me cry. Still, a  curious man might wonder why some sellsword’s whelp would need a soiled septa to instruct him in the  Faith, or a chainless maester to tutor him in history and tongues. And a clever man might question why  your father would engage a hedge knight to train you in arms instead of simply sending you off to  apprentice with one of the free companies. It is almost as if someone wanted to keep you hidden whilst  still preparing you for … what? Now, there’s a puzzlement, but I’m sure that in time it will come to me. I  must admit, you have noble features for a dead boy.”  The boy flushed. “I am not dead.”  “How not? My lord father wrapped your corpse in a crimson cloak and laid you down beside  your sister at the foot of the Iron Throne, his gift to the new king. Those who had the stomach to lift the  cloak said that half your head was gone.”  The lad backed off a step, confused. “Your—?”  “—father, aye. Tywin of House Lannister. Perhaps you may have heard of him.”  Young Griff hesitated. “Lannister? Your father—”   “—is dead. At my hand. If it please Your Grace to call me Yollo or Hugor, so be it, but know that I  was born Tyrion of House Lannister, true-born son of Tywin and Joanna, both of whom I slew. Men will  tell you that I am a kingslayer, a kinslayer, and a liar, and all of that is true … but then, we are a company  of liars, are we not? Take your feigned father. Griff, is it?” The dwarf sniggered. “You should thank the  gods that Varys the Spider is a part of this plot of yours. Griff would not have fooled the cockless wonder  for an instant, no more than it did me. No lord, my lordship says, no knight. And I’m no dwarf. Just  saying a thing does not make it true. Who better to raise Prince Rhaegar’s infant son than Prince  Rhaegar’s dear friend Jon Connington, once Lord of Griffin’s Roost and Hand of the King?”  “Be quiet.” Griff’s voice was uneasy.  On the larboard side of the boat, a huge stone hand was visible just below the water. Two  fingers broke the surface. How many of those are there? Tyrion wondered. A trickle of moisture ran  down his spine and made him shudder. The Sorrows drifted by them. Peering through the mists, he  glimpsed a broken spire, a headless hero, an ancient tree torn from the ground and upended, its huge  roots twisting through the roof and windows of a broken dome. Why does all of this seem so familiar?  Straight on, a tilted stairway of pale marble rose up out of the dark water in a graceful spiral,  ending abruptly ten feet above their heads. No, thought Tyrion, that is not possible.  “Ahead.” Lemore’s voice was shivery. “A light.”  All of them looked. All of them saw it. “Kingfisher,” said Griff. “Her, or some other like her.” But  he drew his sword again.  No one said a word. The Shy Maid moved with the current. Her sail had not been raised since  she first entered the Sorrows. She had no way to move but with the river. Duck stood squinting,  clutching his pole with both hands. After a time even Yandry stopped pushing. Every eye was on the  distant light. As they grew closer, it turned into two lights. Then three.  “The Bridge of Dream,” said Tyrion. “Inconceivable,” said Haldon Halfmaester. “We’ve left the  bridge behind. Rivers only run one way.”  “Mother Rhoyne runs how she will,” murmured Yandry. “Seven save us,” said Lemore.  Up ahead, the stone men on the span began to wail. A few were pointing down at them.  “Haldon, get the prince below,” commanded Griff.  It was too late. The current had them in its teeth. They drifted inexorably toward the bridge.  Yandry stabbed out with his pole to keep them from smashing into a pier. The thrust shoved them  sideways, through a curtain of pale grey moss. Tyrion felt tendrils brush against his face, soft as a  whore’s fingers. Then there was a crash behind him, and the deck tilted so suddenly that he almost lost  his feet and went pitching over the side.  A stone man crashed down into the boat.   He landed on the cabin roof, so heavily that the Shy Maid seemed to rock, and roared a word  down at them in a tongue that Tyrion did not know. A second stone man followed, landing back beside  the tiller. The weathered planks splintered beneath the impact, and Ysilla let out a shriek.  Duck was closest to her. The big man did not waste time reaching for his sword. Instead he  swung his pole, slamming it into the stone man’s chest and knocking him off the boat into the river,  where he sank at once without a sound.  Griff was on the second man the instant he shambled down off the cabin roof. With a sword in  his right hand and a torch in his left, he drove the creature backwards. As the current swept the Shy  Maid beneath the bridge, their shifting shadows danced upon the mossy walls. When the stone man  moved aft, Duck blocked his way, pole in hand. When he went forward, Haldon Halfmaester waved a  second torch at him and drove him back. He had no choice but to come straight at Griff. The captain slid  aside, his blade flashing. A spark flew where the steel bit into the stone man’s calcified grey flesh, but his  arm tumbled to the deck all the same. Griff kicked the limb aside. Yandry and Duck had come up with  their poles. Together they forced the creature over the side and into the black waters of the Rhoyne.  By then the Shy Maid had drifted out from under the broken bridge. “Did we get them all?”  asked Duck. “How many jumped?”  “Two,” said Tyrion, shivering. “Three,” said Haldon. “Behind you.”  The dwarf turned, and there he stood.  The leap had shattered one of his legs, and a jagged piece of pale bone jutted out through the  rotted cloth of his breeches and the grey meat beneath. The broken bone was speckled with brown  blood, but still he lurched forward, reaching for Young Griff. His hand was grey and stiff, but blood oozed  between his knuckles as he tried to close his fingers to grasp. The boy stood staring, as still as if he too  were made of stone. His hand was on his sword hilt, but he seemed to have forgotten why.  Tyrion kicked the lad’s leg out from under him and leapt over him when he fell, thrusting his  torch into the stone man’s face to send him stumbling backwards on his shattered leg, flailing at the  flames with stiff grey hands. The dwarf waddled after him, slashing with the torch, jabbing it at the  stone man’s eyes. A little farther. Back, one more step, another. They were at the edge of the deck when  the creature rushed him, grabbed the torch, and ripped it from his hands. Bugger me, thought Tyrion.  The stone man flung the torch away. There was a soft hiss as the black waters quenched the  flames. The stone man howled. He had been a Summer Islander, before; his jaw and half his cheek had  turned to stone, but his skin was black as midnight where it was not grey. Where he had grasped the  torch, his skin had cracked and split. Blood was seeping from his knuckles though he did not seem to feel  it. That was some small mercy, Tyrion supposed. Though mortal, greyscale was supposedly not painful.  “Stand aside!” someone shouted, far away, and another voice said, “The prince! Protect the  boy!” The stone man staggered forward, his hands outstretched and grasping.   Tyrion drove a shoulder into him.  It felt like slamming into a castle wall, but this castle stood upon a shattered leg. The stone man  went over backwards, grabbing hold of Tyrion as he fell. They hit the river with a towering splash, and  Mother Rhoyne swallowed up the two of them.  The sudden cold hit Tyrion like a hammer. As he sank he felt a stone hand fumbling at his face.  Another closed around his arm, dragging him down into darkness. Blind, his nose full of river, choking,  sinking, he kicked and twisted and fought to pry the clutching fingers off his arm, but the stone fingers  were unyielding. Air bubbled from his lips. The world was black and growing blacker. He could not  breathe.  There are worse ways to die than drowning. And if truth be told, he had perished long ago, back  in King’s Landing. It was only his revenant who remained, the small vengeful ghost who throttled Shae  and put a cross-bow bolt through the great Lord Tywin’s bowels. No man would mourn the thing that  he’d become. I’ll haunt the Seven Kingdoms, he thought, sinking deeper. They would not love me living,  so let them dread me dead.  When he opened his mouth to curse them all, black water filled his lungs, and the dark closed in  around him.  He dreamt of his lord father and the Shrouded Lord. He dreamt that they were one and the  same, and when his father wrapped stone arms around him and bent to give him his grey kiss, he woke  with his mouth dry and rusty with the taste of blood and his heart hammering in his chest.  “Our dead dwarf has returned to us,” Haldon said.  Tyrion shook his head to clear away the webs of dream. The Sorrows. I was lost in the Sorrows. “I  am not dead.”  “That remains to be seen.” The Halfmaester stood over him. “Duck, be a fine fowl and boil some  broth for our little friend here. He must be famished.”  He was on the Shy Maid, Tyrion saw, under a scratchy blanket that smelled of vinegar. The  Sorrows are behind us. It was just a dream I dreamed as I was drowning. “Why do I stink of vinegar?”  “Lemore has been washing you with it. Some say it helps prevent the greyscale. I am inclined to  doubt that, but there was no harm in trying. It was Lemore who forced the water from your lungs after  Griff had pulled you up. You were as cold as ice, and your lips were blue. Yandry said we ought to throw  you back, but the lad forbade it.”  The prince. Memory came rushing back: the stone man reaching out with cracked grey hands,  the blood seeping from his knuckles. He was heavy as a boulder, pulling me under. “Griff brought me  up?” He must hate me, or he would have let me die. “How long have I been sleeping? What place is  this?”  “Selhorys.” Haldon produced a small knife from his sleeve. “Here,” he said, tossing it underhand  at Tyrion.   The dwarf flinched. The knife landed between his feet and stood quivering in the deck. He  plucked it out. “What’s this?”  “Take off your boots. Prick each of your toes and fingers.”  “That sounds … painful.”  “I hope so. Do it.”  Tyrion yanked off one boot and then the other, peeled down his hose, squinted at his toes. It  seemed to him they looked no better or worse than usual. He poked gingerly at one big toe.  “Harder,” urged Haldon Halfmaester.  “Do you want me to draw blood?”  “If need be.”  “I’ll have a scab on every toe.”  “The purpose of the exercise is not to count your toes. I want to see you wince. So long as the  pricks hurt, you are safe. It is only when you cannot feel the blade that you will have cause to fear.”  Greyscale. Tyrion grimaced. He stabbed another toe, cursed as a bead of blood welled up  around the knife’s point. “That hurt. Are you happy?”  “Dancing with joy.”  “Your feet smell worse than mine, Yollo.” Duck had a cup of broth. “Griff warned you not to lay  hands upon the stone men.”  “Aye, but he forgot to warn the stone men not to lay their hands upon me.”  “As you prick, look for patches of dead grey skin, for nails beginning to turn black,” said Haldon.  “If you see such signs, do not hesitate. Better to lose a toe than a foot. Better to lose an arm than spend  your days wailing on the Bridge of Dream. Now the other foot, if you please. Then your fingers.”  The dwarf recrossed his stunted legs and began to prick the other set of toes. “Shall I prick my  prick as well?”  “It would not hurt.”  “It would not hurt you is what you mean. Though I had as well slice it off for all the use I make of  it.”  “Feel free. We will have it tanned and stuffed and sell it for a fortune. A dwarf’s cock has magical  powers.”   “I have been telling all the women that for years.” Tyrion drove the dagger’s point into the ball  of his thumb, watched the blood bead up, sucked it away. “How long must I continue to torture myself?  When will we be certain that I’m clean?”  “Truly?” said the Halfmaester. “Never. You swallowed half the river. You may be going grey even  now, turning to stone from inside out, starting with your heart and lungs. If so, pricking your toes and  bathing in vinegar will not save you. When you’re done, come have some broth.”  The broth was good, though Tyrion noted that the Halfmaester kept the table between them as  he ate. The Shy Maid was moored to a weathered pier on the east bank of the Rhoyne. Two piers down,  a Volantene river galley was discharging soldiers. Shops and stalls and storehouses huddled beneath a  sandstone wall. The towers and domes of the city were visible beyond it, reddened by the light of the  setting sun.  No, not a city. Selhorys was still accounted a mere town, and was ruled from Old Volantis. This  was not Westeros.  Lemore emerged on deck with the prince in tow. When she saw Tyrion, she rushed across the  deck to hug him. “The Mother is merciful. We have prayed for you, Hugor.”  You did, at least. “I won’t hold that against you.”  Young Griff’s greeting was less effusive. The princeling was in a sullen mood, angry that he had  been forced to remain on the Shy Maid instead of going ashore with Yandry and Ysilla. “We only want to  keep you safe,” Lemore told him. “These are unsettled times.”  Haldon Halfmaester explained. “On the way down from the Sorrows to Selhorys, we thrice  glimpsed riders moving south along the river’s eastern shore. Dothraki. Once they were so close we  could hear the bells tinkling in their braids, and sometimes at night their fires could be seen beyond the  eastern hills. We passed warships as well, Volantene river galleys crammed with slave soldiers. The  triarchs fear an attack upon Selhorys, plainly.”  Tyrion understood that quick enough. Alone amongst the major river towns, Selhorys stood  upon the eastern bank of the Rhoyne, making it much more vulnerable to the horselords than its sister  towns across the river. Even so, it is a small prize. If I were khal, I would feint at Selhorys, let the  Volantenes rush to defend it, then swing south and ride hard for Volantis itself.  “I know how to use a sword,” Young Griff was insisting.  “Even the bravest of your forebears kept his Kingsguard close about him in times of peril.”  Lemore had changed out of her septa’s robes into garb more befitting the wife or daughter of a  prosperous merchant. Tyrion watched her closely. He had sniffed out the truth beneath the dyed blue  hair of Griff and Young Griff easily enough, and Yandry and Ysilla seemed to be no more than they  claimed to be, whilst Duck was somewhat less. Lemore, though … Who is she, really? Why is she here?  Not for gold, I’d judge. What is this prince to her? Was she ever a true septa?   Haldon took note of her change of garb as well. “What are we to make of this sudden loss of  faith? I preferred you in your septa’s robes, Lemore.”  “I preferred her naked,” said Tyrion.  Lemore gave him a reproachful look. “That is because you have a wicked soul. Septa’s robes  scream of Westeros and might draw unwelcome eyes onto us.” She turned back to Prince Aegon. “You  are not the only one who must needs hide.”  The lad did not seem appeased. The perfect prince but still half a boy for all that, with little and  less experience of the world and all its woes. “Prince Aegon,” said Tyrion, “since we’re both stuck aboard  this boat, perhaps you will honor me with a game of cyvasse to while away the hours?”  The prince gave him a wary look. “I am sick of cyvasse.”  “Sick of losing to a dwarf, you mean?”  That pricked the lad’s pride, just as Tyrion had known it would. “Go fetch the board and pieces.  This time I mean to smash you.”  They played on deck, sitting cross-legged behind the cabin. Young Griff arrayed his army for  attack, with dragon, elephants, and heavy horse up front. A young man’s formation, as bold as it is  foolish. He risks all for the quick kill. He let the prince have first move. Haldon stood behind them,  watching the play.  When the prince reached for his dragon, Tyrion cleared his throat. “I would not do that if I were  you. It is a mistake to bring your dragon out too soon.” He smiled innocently. “Your father knew the  dangers of being over-bold.”  “Did you know my true father?”  “Well, I saw him twice or thrice, but I was only ten when Robert killed him, and mine own sire  had me hidden underneath a rock. No, I cannot claim I knew Prince Rhaegar. Not as your false father  did. Lord Connington was the prince’s dearest friend, was he not?”  Young Griff pushed a lock of blue hair out of his eyes. “They were squires together at King’s  Landing.”  “A true friend, our Lord Connington. He must be, to remain so fiercely loyal to the grandson of  the king who took his lands and titles and sent him into exile. A pity about that. Elsewise Prince  Rhaegar’s friend might have been on hand when my father sacked King’s Landing, to save Prince  Rhaegar’s precious little son from getting his royal brains dashed out against a wall.”  The lad flushed. “That was not me. I told you. That was some tanner’s son from Pisswater Bend  whose mother died birthing him. His father sold him to Lord Varys for a jug of Arbor gold. He had other   sons but had never tasted Arbor gold. Varys gave the Pisswater boy to my lady mother and carried me  away.”  “Aye.” Tyrion moved his elephants. “And when the pisswater prince was safely dead, the  eunuch smuggled you across the narrow sea to his fat friend the cheesemonger, who hid you on a  poleboat and found an exile lord willing to call himself your father. It does make for a splendid story, and  the singers will make much of your escape once you take the Iron Throne … assuming that our fair  Daenerys takes you for her consort.”  “She will. She must.”  “Must?” Tyrion made a tsking sound. “That is not a word queens like to hear. You are her  perfect prince, agreed, bright and bold and comely as any maid could wish. Daenerys Targaryen is no  maid, however. She is the widow of a Dothraki khal, a mother of dragons and sacker of cities, Aegon the  Conqueror with teats. She may not prove as willing as you wish.”  “She’ll be willing.” Prince Aegon sounded shocked. It was plain that he had never before  considered the possibility that his bride-to-be might refuse him. “You don’t know her.” He picked up his  heavy horse and put it down with a thump.  The dwarf shrugged. “I know that she spent her childhood in exile, impoverished, living on  dreams and schemes, running from one city to the next, always fearful, never safe, friendless but for a  brother who was by all accounts half-mad … a brother who sold her maidenhood to the Dothraki for the  promise of an army. I know that somewhere out upon the grass her dragons hatched, and so did she. I  know she is proud. How not? What else was left her but pride? I know she is strong. How not? The  Dothraki despise weakness. If Daenerys had been weak, she would have perished with Viserys. I know  she is fierce. Astapor, Yunkai, and Meereen are proof enough of that. She has crossed the grasslands  and the red waste, survived assassins and conspiracies and fell sorceries, grieved for a brother and a  husband and a son, trod the cities of the slavers to dust beneath her dainty sandaled feet. Now, how do  you suppose this queen will react when you turn up with your begging bowl in hand and say, ‘Good  morrow to you, Auntie. I am your nephew, Aegon, returned from the dead. I’ve been hiding on a  poleboat all my life, but now I’ve washed the blue dye from my hair and I’d like a dragon, please … and  oh, did I mention, my claim to the Iron Throne is stronger than your own?’ ”  Aegon’s mouth twisted in fury. “I will not come to my aunt a beggar. I will come to her a  kinsman, with an army.”  “A small army.” There, that’s made him good and angry. The dwarf could not help but think of  Joffrey. I have a gift for angering princes. “Queen Daenerys has a large one, and no thanks to you.”  Tyrion moved his crossbows.  “Say what you want. She will be my bride, Lord Connington will see to it. I trust him as much as if  he were my own blood.”   “Perhaps you should be the fool instead of me. Trust no one, my prince. Not your chainless  maester, not your false father, not the gallant Duck nor the lovely Lemore nor these other fine friends  who grew you from a bean. Above all, trust not the cheesemonger, nor the Spider, nor this little dragon  queen you mean to marry. All that mistrust will sour your stomach and keep you awake by night, ’tis  true, but better that than the long sleep that does not end.” The dwarf pushed his black dragon across a  range of mountains. “But what do I know? Your false father is a great lord, and I am just some twisted  little monkey man. Still, I’d do things differently.”  That got the boy’s attention. “How differently?”  “If I were you? I would go west instead of east. Land in Dorne and raise my banners. The Seven  Kingdoms will never be more ripe for conquest than they are right now. A boy king sits the Iron Throne.  The north is in chaos, the riverlands a devastation, a rebel holds Storm’s End and Dragonstone. When  winter comes, the realm will starve. And who remains to deal with all of this, who rules the little king  who rules the Seven Kingdoms? Why, my own sweet sister. There is no one else. My brother, Jaime,  thirsts for battle, not for power. He’s run from every chance he’s had to rule. My uncle Kevan would  make a passably good regent if someone pressed the duty on him, but he will never reach for it. The  gods shaped him to be a follower, not a leader.” Well, the gods and my lord father. “Mace Tyrell would  grasp the sceptre gladly, but mine own kin are not like to step aside and give it to him. And everyone  hates Stannis. Who does that leave? Why, only Cersei.  “Westeros is torn and bleeding, and I do not doubt that even now my sweet sister is binding up  the wounds … with salt. Cersei is as gentle as King Maegor, as selfless as Aegon the Unworthy, as wise as  Mad Aerys. She never forgets a slight, real or imagined. She takes caution for cowardice and dissent for  defiance. And she is greedy. Greedy for power, for honor, for love. Tommen’s rule is bolstered by all of  the alliances that my lord father built so carefully, but soon enough she will destroy them, every one.  Land and raise your banners, and men will flock to your cause. Lords great and small, and smallfolk too.  But do not wait too long, my prince. The moment will not last. The tide that lifts you now will soon  recede. Be certain you reach Westeros before my sister falls and someone more competent takes her  place.”  “But,” Prince Aegon said, “without Daenerys and her dragons, how could we hope to win?”  “You do not need to win,” Tyrion told him. “All you need to do is raise your banners, rally your  supporters, and hold, until Daenerys arrives to join her strength to yours.”  “You said she might not have me.”  “Perhaps I overstated. She may take pity on you when you come begging for her hand.” The  dwarf shrugged. “Do you want to wager your throne upon a woman’s whim? Go to Westeros, though …  ah, then you are a rebel, not a beggar. Bold, reckless, a true scion of House Targaryen, walking in the  footsteps of Aegon the Conqueror. A dragon.   “I told you, I know our little queen. Let her hear that her brother Rhaegar’s murdered son is still  alive, that this brave boy has raised the dragon standard of her forebears in Westeros once more, that  he is fighting a desperate war to avenge his father and reclaim the Iron Throne for House Targaryen,  hard-pressed on every side … and she will fly to your side as fast as wind and water can carry her. You  are the last of her line, and this Mother of Dragons, this Breaker of Chains, is above all a rescuer. The girl  who drowned the slaver cities in blood rather than leave strangers to their chains can scarcely abandon  her own brother’s son in his hour of peril. And when she reaches Westeros, and meets you for the first  time, you will meet as equals, man and woman, not queen and supplicant. How can she help but love  you then, I ask you?” Smiling, he seized his dragon, flew it across the board. “I hope Your Grace will  pardon me. Your king is trapped. Death in four.”  The prince stared at the playing board. “My dragon—”  “—is too far away to save you. You should have moved her to the center of the battle.”  “But you said—”  “I lied. Trust no one. And keep your dragon close.”  Young Griff jerked to his feet and kicked over the board. Cyvasse pieces flew in all directions,  bouncing and rolling across the deck of the Shy Maid. “Pick those up,” the boy commanded.  He may well be a Targaryen after all. “If it please Your Grace.” Tyrion got down on his hands and  knees and began to crawl about the deck, gathering up pieces.  It was close to dusk when Yandry and Ysilla returned to the Shy Maid. A porter trotted at their  heels, pushing a wheelbarrow heaped high with provisions: salt and flour, fresh-churned butter, slabs of  bacon wrapped in linen, sacks of oranges, apples, and pears. Yandry had a wine cask on one shoulder,  while Ysilla had slung a pike over hers. The fish was as large as Tyrion.  When she saw the dwarf standing at the end of the gangplank, Ysilla stopped so suddenly that  Yandry blundered into her, and the pike almost slid off her back into the river. Duck helped her rescue it.  Ysilla glared at Tyrion and made a peculiar stabbing gesture with three of her fingers. A sign to ward off  evil. “Let me help you with that fish,” he said to Duck.  “No,” Ysilla snapped. “Stay away. Touch no food besides the food you eat yourself.”  The dwarf raised both hands. “As you command.”  Yandry thumped the wine cask down onto the desk. “Where’s Griff?” he demanded of Haldon.  “Asleep.”  “Then rouse him. We have tidings he’d best hear. The queen’s name is on every tongue in  Selhorys. They say she still sits in Meereen, sore beset. If the talk in the markets can be believed, Old  Volantis will soon join the war against her.”   Haldon pursed his lips. “The gossip of fishmongers is not to be relied on. Still, I suppose Griff will  want to hear. You know how he is.” The Halfmaester went below.  The girl never started for the west. No doubt she had good reasons. Between Meereen and  Volantis lay five hundred leagues of deserts, mountains, swamps, and ruins, plus Mantarys with its  sinister repute. A city of monsters, they say, but if she marches overland, where else is she to turn for  food and water? The sea would be swifter, but if she does not have the ships …  By the time Griff appeared on deck, the pike was spitting and sizzling over the brazier whilst  Ysilla hovered over it with a lemon, squeezing. The sellsword wore his mail and wolfskin cloak, soft  leather gloves, dark woolen breeches. If he was surprised to see Tyrion awake, he gave no sign beyond  his customary scowl. He took Yandry back to the tiller, where they spoke in low voices, too quietly for  the dwarf to hear.  Finally Griff beckoned to Haldon. “We need to know the truth of these rumors. Go ashore and  learn what you can. Qavo will know, if you can find him. Try the Riverman and the Painted Turtle. You  know his other places.”  “Aye. I’ll take the dwarf as well. Four ears hear more than two. And you know how Qavo is  about his cyvasse.”  “As you wish. Be back before the sun comes up. If for any reason you’re delayed, make your way  to the Golden Company.”  Spoken like a lord. Tyrion kept the thought to himself.  Haldon donned a hooded cloak, and Tyrion shed his homemade motley for something drab and  grey. Griff allowed them each a purse of silver from Illyrio’s chests. “To loosen tongues.”  Dusk was giving way to darkness as they made their way along the riverfront. Some of the ships  they passed appeared deserted, their gangplanks drawn up. Others crawled with armed men who eyed  them with suspicion. Under the town walls, parchment lanterns had been lit above the stalls, throwing  pools of colored light upon the cobbled path. Tyrion watched as Haldon’s face turned green, then red,  then purple. Under the cacophony of foreign tongues, he heard queer music playing from somewhere  up ahead, a thin high fluting accompanied by drums. A dog was barking too, behind them.  And the whores were out. River or sea, a port was a port, and wherever you found sailors, you’d  find whores. Is that what my father meant? Is that where whores go, to the sea?  The whores of Lannisport and King’s Landing were free women. Their sisters of Selhorys were  slaves, their bondage indicated by the tears tattooed beneath their right eyes. Old as sin and twice as  ugly, the lot of them. It was almost enough to put a man off whoring. Tyrion felt their eyes upon them as  he waddled by, and heard them whispering to one another and giggling behind their hands. You would  think they had never seen a dwarf before.   A squad of Volantene spearmen stood guard at the river gate. Torch-light gleamed off the steel  claws that jutted from their gauntlets. Their helms were tiger’s masks, the faces beneath marked by  green stripes tattooed across both cheeks. The slave soldiers of Volantis were fiercely proud of their  tiger stripes, Tyrion knew. Do they yearn for freedom? he wondered. What would they do if this child  queen bestowed it on them? What are they, if not tigers? What am I, if not a lion?  One of the tigers spied the dwarf and said something that made the others laugh. As they  reached the gate, he pulled off his clawed gauntlet and the sweaty glove beneath, locked one arm  around the dwarf’s neck, and roughly rubbed his head. Tyrion was too startled to resist. It was all over in  a heartbeat. “Was there some reason for that?” he demanded of the Halfmaester.  “He says that it is good luck to rub the head of a dwarf,” Haldon said after an exchange with the  guard in his own tongue.  Tyrion forced himself to smile at the man. “Tell him that it is even better luck to suck on a  dwarf’s cock.”  “Best not. Tigers have been known to have sharp teeth.”  A different guard motioned them through the gate, waving a torch at them impatiently. Haldon  Halfmaester led the way into Selhorys proper, with Tyrion waddling warily at his heels.  A great square opened up before them. Even at this hour, it was crowded and noisy and ablaze  with light. Lanterns swung from iron chains above the doors of inns and pleasure houses, but within the  gates, they were made of colored glass, not parchment. To their right a nightfire burned outside a  temple of red stone. A priest in scarlet robes stood on the temple balcony, haranguing the small crowd  that had gathered around the flames. Elsewhere, travelers sat playing cyvasse in front of an inn, drunken  soldiers wandered in and out of what was obviously a brothel, a woman beat a mule outside a stable. A  two-wheeled cart went rumbling past them, pulled by a white dwarf elephant. This is another world,  thought Tyrion, but not so different from the world I know.  The square was dominated by a white marble statue of a headless man in impossibly ornate  armor, astride a warhorse similarly arrayed. “Who might that be?” wondered Tyrion.  “Triarch Horonno. A Volantene hero from the Century of Blood. He was returned as triarch  every year for forty years, until he wearied of elections and declared himself triarch for life. The  Volantenes were not amused. He was put to death soon after. Tied between two elephants and torn in  half.”  “His statue seems to lack a head.”  “He was a tiger. When the elephants came to power, their followers went on a rampage,  knocking the heads from the statues of those they blamed for all the wars and deaths.” He shrugged.  “That was another age. Come, we’d best hear what that priest is going on about. I swear I heard the  name Daenerys.”   Across the square they joined the growing throng outside the red temple. With the locals  towering above him on every hand, the little man found it hard to see much beyond their arses. He  could hear most every word the priest was saying, but that was not to say he understood them. “Do you  understand what he is saying?” he asked Haldon in the Common Tongue.  “I would if I did not have a dwarf piping in my ear.”  “I do not pipe.” Tyrion crossed his arms and looked behind him, studying the faces of the men  and women who had stopped to listen. Everywhere he turned, he saw tattoos. Slaves. Four of every five  of them are slaves.  “The priest is calling on the Volantenes to go to war,” the Halfmaester told him, “but on the side  of right, as soldiers of the Lord of Light, R’hllor who made the sun and stars and fights eternally against  the darkness. Nyessos and Malaquo have turned away from the light, he says, their hearts darkened by  the yellow harpies from the east. He says …”  “Dragons. I understood that word. He said dragons.”  “Aye. The dragons have come to carry her to glory.”  “Her. Daenerys?”  Haldon nodded. “Benerro has sent forth the word from Volantis. Her coming is the fulfillment of  an ancient prophecy. From smoke and salt was she born to make the world anew. She is Azor Ahai  returned … and her triumph over darkness will bring a summer that will never end … death itself will  bend its knee, and all those who die fighting in her cause shall be reborn …”  “Do I have to be reborn in this same body?” asked Tyrion. The crowd was growing thicker. He  could feel them pressing in around them. “Who is Benerro?”  Haldon raised an eyebrow. “High Priest of the red temple in Volantis. Flame of Truth, Light of  Wisdom, First Servant of the Lord of Light, Slave of R’hllor.”  The only red priest Tyrion had ever known was Thoros of Myr, the portly, genial, wine-stained  roisterer who had loitered about Robert’s court swilling the king’s finest vintages and setting his sword  on fire for mêlées. “Give me priests who are fat and corrupt and cynical,” he told Haldon, “the sort who  like to sit on soft satin cushions, nibble sweetmeats, and diddle little boys. It’s the ones who believe in  gods who make the trouble.”  “It may be that we can use this trouble to our advantage. I know where we may find answers.”  Haldon led them past the headless hero to where a big stone inn fronted on the square. The ridged shell  of some immense turtle hung above its door, painted in garish colors. Inside a hundred dim red candles  burned like distant stars. The air was fragrant with the smell of roasted meat and spices, and a slave girl  with a turtle on one cheek was pouring pale green wine.  Haldon paused in the doorway. “There. Those two.”   In the alcove two men sat over a carved stone cyvasse table, squinting at their pieces by the  light of a red candle. One was gaunt and sallow, with thinning black hair and a blade of a nose. The other  was wide of shoulder and round of belly, with corkscrew ringlets tumbling past his collar. Neither  deigned to look up from their game until Haldon drew up a chair between them and said, “My dwarf  plays better cyvasse than both of you combined.”  The bigger man raised his eyes to gaze at the intruders in distaste and said something in the  tongue of Old Volantis, too fast for Tyrion to hope to follow. The thinner one leaned back in his chair. “Is  he for sale?” he asked in the Common Tongue of Westeros. “The triarch’s grotesquerie is in need of a  cyvasse-playing dwarf.”  “Yollo is no slave.”  “What a pity.” The thin man shifted an onyx elephant.  Across the cyvasse table, the man behind the alabaster army pursed his lips in disapproval. He  moved his heavy horse.  “A blunder,” said Tyrion. He had as well play his part. “Just so,” the thin man said. He answered  with his own heavy horse. A flurry of quick moves followed, until finally the thin man smiled and said,  “Death, my friend.”  The big man glowered at the board, then rose and growled something in his own tongue. His  opponent laughed. “Come now. The dwarf does not stink as bad as that.” He beckoned Tyrion toward  the empty chair. “Up with you, little man. Put your silver on the table, and we will see how well you play  the game.”  Which game? Tyrion might have asked. He climbed onto the chair. “I play better with a full belly  and a cup of wine to hand.” The thin man turned obligingly and called for the slave girl to fetch them  food and drink.  Haldon said, “The noble Qavo Nogarys is the customs officer here in Selhorys. I have never once  defeated him at cyvasse.”  Tyrion understood. “Perhaps I will be more fortunate.” He opened his purse and stacked silver  coins beside the board, one atop another until finally Qavo smiled.  As each of them was setting up his pieces behind the cyvasse screen, Haldon said, “What news  from downriver? Will it be war?”  Qavo shrugged. “The Yunkai’i would have it so. They style themselves the Wise Masters. Of their  wisdom I cannot speak, but they do not lack for cunning. Their envoy came to us with chests of gold and  gems and two hundred slaves, nubile girls and smooth-skinned boys trained in the way of the seven  sighs. I am told his feasts are memorable and his bribes lavish.”  “The Yunkishmen have bought your triarchs?”   “Only Nyessos.” Qavo removed the screen and studied the placement of Tyrion’s army.  “Malaquo may be old and toothless, but he is a tiger still, and Doniphos will not be returned as triarch.  The city thirsts for war.”  “Why?” wondered Tyrion. “Meereen is long leagues across the sea. How has this sweet child  queen offended Old Volantis?”  “Sweet?” Qavo laughed. “If even half the stories coming back from Slaver’s Bay are true, this  child is a monster. They say that she is blood-thirsty, that those who speak against her are impaled on  spikes to die lingering deaths. They say she is a sorceress who feeds her dragons on the flesh of newborn  babes, an oathbreaker who mocks the gods, breaks truces, threatens envoys, and turns on those who  have served her loyally. They say her lust cannot be sated, that she mates with men, women, eunuchs,  even dogs and children, and woe betide the lover who fails to satisfy her. She gives her body to men to  take their souls in thrall.”  Oh, good, thought Tyrion. If she gives her body to me, she is welcome to my soul, small and  stunted though it is.  “They say,” said Haldon. “By they, you mean the slavers, the exiles she drove from Astapor and  Meereen. Mere calumnies.”  “The best calumnies are spiced with truth,” suggested Qavo, “but the girl’s true sin cannot be  denied. This arrogant child has taken it upon herself to smash the slave trade, but that traffic was never  confined to Slaver’s Bay. It was part of the sea of trade that spanned the world, and the dragon queen  has clouded the water. Behind the Black Wall, lords of ancient blood sleep poorly, listening as their  kitchen slaves sharpen their long knives. Slaves grow our food, clean our streets, teach our young. They  guard our walls, row our galleys, fight our battles. And now when they look east, they see this young  queen shining from afar, this breaker of chains. The Old Blood cannot suffer that. Poor men hate her  too. Even the vilest beggar stands higher than a slave. This dragon queen would rob him of that  consolation.”  Tyrion advanced his spearmen. Qavo replied with his light horse. Tyrion moved his  crossbowmen up a square and said, “The red priest outside seemed to think Volantis should fight for  this silver queen, not against her.”  “The red priests would be wise to hold their tongues,” said Qavo Nogarys. “Already there has  been fighting between their followers and those who worship other gods. Benerro’s rantings will only  serve to bring a savage wrath down upon his head.”  “What rantings?” the dwarf asked, toying with his rabble.  The Volantene waved a hand. “In Volantis, thousands of slaves and freedmen crowd the temple  plaza every night to hear Benerro shriek of bleeding stars and a sword of fire that will cleanse the world.  He has been preaching that Volantis will surely burn if the triarchs take up arms against the silver  queen.”   “That’s a prophecy even I could make. Ah, supper.”  Supper was a plate of roasted goat served on a bed of sliced onions. The meat was spiced and  fragrant, charred outside and red and juicy within. Tyrion plucked at a piece. It was so hot it burned his  fingers, but so good he could not help but reach for another chunk. He washed it down with the pale  green Volantene liquor, the closest thing he’d had to wine for ages. “Very good,” he said, plucking up his  dragon. “The most powerful piece in the game,” he announced, as he removed one of Qavo’s elephants.  “And Daenerys Targaryen has three, it’s said.”  “Three,” Qavo allowed, “against thrice three thousand enemies. Grazdan mo Eraz was not the  only envoy sent out from the Yellow City. When the Wise Masters move against Meereen, the legions of  New Ghis will fight beside them. Tolosi. Elyrians. Even the Dothraki.”  “You have Dothraki outside your own gates,” Haldon said. “Khal Pono.” Qavo waved a pale hand  in dismissal. “The horselords come, we give them gifts, the horselords go.” He moved his catapult again,  closed his hand around Tyrion’s alabaster dragon, removed it from the board.  The rest was slaughter, though the dwarf held on another dozen moves. “The time has come for  bitter tears,” Qavo said at last, scooping up the pile of silver. “Another game?”  “No need,” said Haldon. “My dwarf has had his lesson in humility. I think it is best we get back to  our boat.”  Outside in the square, the nightfire was still burning, but the priest was gone and the crowd was  long dispersed. The glow of candles glimmered from the windows of the brothel. From inside came the  sound of women’s laughter. “The night is still young,” said Tyrion. “Qavo may not have told us  everything. And whores hear much and more from the men they service.”  “Do you need a woman so badly, Yollo?”  “A man grows weary of having no lovers but his fingers.” Selhorys may be where whores go.  Tysha might be in there even now, with tears tattooed upon her cheek. “I almost drowned. A man needs  a woman after that. Besides, I need to make sure my prick hasn’t turned to stone.”  The Halfmaester laughed. “I will wait for you in the tavern by the gate. Do not be too long about  your business.”  “Oh, have no fear on that count. Most women prefer to be done with me as quickly as they  can.”  The brothel was a modest one compared to those the dwarf had been wont to frequent in  Lannisport and King’s Landing. The proprietor did not seem to speak any tongue but that of Volantis, but  he understood the clank of silver well enough and led Tyrion through an archway into a long room that  smelled of incense, where four bored slave girls were lounging about in various states of undress. Two  had seen at least forty namedays come and go, he guessed; the youngest was perhaps fifteen or sixteen.   None was as hideous as the whores he’d seen working the docks, though they fell well short of beauty.  One was plainly pregnant. Another was just fat, and sported iron rings in both her nipples. All four had  tears tattooed beneath one eye.  “Do you have a girl who speaks the tongue of Westeros?” asked Tyrion. The proprietor squinted,  uncomprehending, so he repeated the question in High Valyrian. This time the man seemed to grasp a  word or three and replied in Volantene. “Sunset girl” was all the dwarf could get out of his answer. He  took that to mean a girl from the Sunset Kingdoms.  There was only one such in the house, and she was not Tysha. She had freckled cheeks and tight  red curls upon her head, which gave promise of freckled breasts and red hair between her legs. “She’ll  do,” said Tyrion, “and I’ll have a flagon too. Red wine with red flesh.” The whore was looking at his  noseless face with revulsion in her eyes. “Do I offend you, sweet-ling? I am an offensive creature, as my  father would be glad to tell you if he were not dead and rotting.”  Though she did look Westerosi, the girl spoke not a word of the Common Tongue. Perhaps she  was captured by some slaver as a child. Her bedchamber was small, but there was a Myrish carpet on  the floor and a mattress stuffed with feathers in place of straw. I have seen worse. “Will you give me  your name?” he asked, as he took a cup of wine from her. “No?” The wine was strong and sour and  required no translation. “I suppose I shall settle for your cunt.” He wiped his mouth with the back of his  hand. “Have you ever bedded a monster before? Now’s as good a time as any. Out of your clothes and  onto your back, if it please you. Or not.”  She looked at him uncomprehending, until he took the flagon from her hands and lifted her  skirts up over her head. After that she understood what was required of her, though she did not prove  the liveliest of partners. Tyrion had been so long without a woman that he spent himself inside her on  the third thrust.  He rolled off feeling more ashamed than sated. This was a mistake. What a wretched creature  I’ve become. “Do you know a woman by the name of Tysha?” he asked, as he watched his seed dribble  out of her onto the bed. The whore did not respond. “Do you know where whores go?” She did not  answer that one either. Her back was crisscrossed by ridges of scar tissue. This girl is as good as dead. I  have just fucked a corpse. Even her eyes looked dead. She does not even have the strength to loathe me.  He needed wine. A lot of wine. He seized the flagon with both hands and raised it to his lips. The  wine ran red. Down his throat, down his chin. It dripped from his beard and soaked the feather bed. In  the candlelight it looked as dark as the wine that had poisoned Joffrey. When he was done he tossed the  empty flagon aside and half-rolled and half-staggered to the floor, groping for a chamber pot. There was  none to be found. His stomach heaved, and he found himself on his knees, retching on the carpet, that  wonderful thick Myrish carpet, as comforting as lies.  The whore cried out in distress. They will blame her for this, he realized, ashamed. “Cut off my  head and take it to King’s Landing,” Tyrion urged her. “My sister will make a lady of you, and no one will   ever whip you again.” She did not understand that either, so he shoved her legs apart, crawled between  them, and took her once more. That much she could comprehend, at least.  Afterward the wine was done and so was he, so he wadded up the girl’s clothing and tossed it at  the door. She took the hint and fled, leaving him alone in the darkness, sinking deeper into his feather  bed. I am stinking drunk. He dare not close his eyes, for fear of sleep. Beyond the veil of dream, the  Sorrows were waiting for him. Stone steps ascending endlessly, steep and slick and treacherous, and  somewhere at the top, the Shrouded Lord. I do not want to meet the Shrouded Lord. Tyrion fumbled  back into his clothes again and groped his way to the stair. Griff will flay me. Well, why not? If ever a  dwarf deserved a skinning, I’m him.  Halfway down the steps, he lost his footing. Somehow he managed to break his tumble with his  hands and turn it into a clumsy thumping cartwheel. The whores in the room below looked up in  astonishment when he landed at the foot of the steps. Tyrion rolled onto his feet and gave them a bow.  “I am more agile when I’m drunk.” He turned to the proprietor. “I fear I ruined your carpet. The girl’s not  to blame. Let me pay.” He pulled out a fistful of coins and tossed them at the man.  “Imp,” a deep voice said, behind him.  In the corner of the room, a man sat in a pool of shadow, with a whore squirming on his lap. I  never saw that girl. If I had, I would have taken her upstairs instead of freckles. She was younger than  the others, slim and pretty, with long silvery hair. Lyseni, at a guess … but the man whose lap she filled  was from the Seven Kingdoms. Burly and broad-shouldered, forty if he was a day, and maybe older. Half  his head was bald, but coarse stubble covered his cheeks and chin, and hair grew thickly down his arms,  sprouting even from his knuckles.  Tyrion did not like the look of him. He liked the big black bear on his surcoat even less. Wool.  He’s wearing wool, in this heat. Who else but a knight would be so fucking mad? “How pleasant to hear  the Common Tongue so far from home,” he made himself say, “but I fear you have mistaken me. My  name is Hugor Hill. May I buy you a cup of wine, my friend?”  “I’ve drunk enough.” The knight shoved his whore aside and got to his feet. His sword belt hung  on a peg beside him. He took it down and drew his blade. Steel whispered against leather. The whores  were watching avidly, candlelight shining in their eyes. The proprietor had vanished. “You’re mine,  Hugor.”  Tyrion could no more outrun him than outfight him. Drunk as he was, he could not even hope to  outwit him. He spread his hands. “And what do you mean to do with me?”  “Deliver you,” the knight said, “to the queen.”  By the time they reached Volantis, the sky was purple to the west and black to the east, and the  stars were coming out. The same stars as in Westeros, Tyrion Lannister reflected.  He might have taken some comfort in that if he had not been trussed up like a goose and lashed  to a saddle. He had given up squirming. The knots that bound him were too tight. Instead he’d gone as  limp as a sack of meal. Saving my strength, he told himself, though for what he could not have said.  Volantis closed its gates at dark, and the guardsmen on its northern gate were grumbling  impatiently at the stragglers. They joined the queue behind a wagon laden with limes and oranges. The  guards motioned the wagon through with their torches but took a harder look at the big Andal on his  warhorse, with his longsword and his mail. A captain was summoned. Whilst he and the knight  exchanged some words in Volantene, one of the guardsmen pulled off his clawed gauntlet and gave  Tyrion’s head a rub. “I’m full of good fortune,” the dwarf told him. “Cut me loose, friend, and I’ll see  you’re well rewarded.”  His captor overheard. “Save your lies for those who speak your tongue, Imp,” he said, when the  Volantenes waved them on.  They were moving again, through the gate and beneath the city’s massive walls. “You speak my  tongue. Can I sway you with promises, or are you determined to buy a lordship with my head?”  “I was a lord, by right of birth. I want no hollow titles.”  “That’s all you’re like to get from my sweet sister.”  “And here I’d heard a Lannister always pays his debts.”  “Oh, every penny … but never a groat more, my lord. You’ll get the meal you bargained for, but  it won’t be sauced with gratitude, and in the end it will not nourish you.”   “Might be all I want is to see you pay for crimes. The kinslayer is accursed in the eyes of gods  and men.”  “The gods are blind. And men see only what they wish.”  “I see you plain enough, Imp.” Something dark had crept into the knight’s tone. “I have done  things I am not proud of, things that brought shame onto my House and my father’s name … but to kill  your own sire? How could any man do that?”  “Give me a crossbow and pull down your breeches, and I’ll show you.” Gladly.  “You think this is a jape?”  “I think life is a jape. Yours, mine, everyone’s.”  Inside the city walls, they rode past guildhalls, markets, and bathhouses. Fountains splashed and  sang in the centers of wide squares, where men sat at stone tables, moving cyvasse pieces and sipping  wine from glass flutes as slaves lit ornate lanterns to hold the dark at bay. Palms and cedars grew along  the cobbled road, and monuments stood at every junction. Many of the statues lacked heads, the dwarf  noted, yet even headless they still managed to look imposing in the purple dusk.  As the warhorse plodded south along the river, the shops grew smaller and meaner, the trees  along the street became a row of stumps. Cobblestones gave way to devilgrass beneath their horse’s  hooves, then to soft wet mud the color of a baby’s nightsoil. The little bridges that spanned the small  streams that fed the Rhoyne creaked alarmingly beneath their weight. Where a fort had once  overlooked the river now stood a broken gate, gaping open like an old man’s toothless mouth. Goats  could be glimpsed peering over the parapets.  Old Volantis, first daughter of Valyria, the dwarf mused. Proud Volantis, queen of the Rhoyne  and mistress of the Summer Sea, home to noble lords and lovely ladies of the most ancient blood. Never  mind the packs of naked children that roamed the alleys screaming in shrill voices, or the bravos  standing in the doors of wineshops fingering their sword hilts, or the slaves with their bent backs and  tattooed faces who scurried everywhere like cockroaches. Mighty Volantis, grandest and most populous  of the Nine Free Cities. Ancient wars had depopulated much of the city, however, and large areas of  Volantis had begun to sink back into the mud on which it stood. Beautiful Volantis, city of fountains and  flowers. But half the fountains were dry, half the pools cracked and stagnant. Flowering vines sent up  creepers from every crack in the wall or pavement, and young trees had taken root in the walls of  abandoned shops and roofless temples.  And then there was the smell. It hung in the hot, humid air, rich, rank, pervasive. There’s fish in  it, and flowers, and some elephant dung as well. Something sweet and something earthy and something  dead and rotten. “This city smells like an old whore,” Tyrion announced. “Like some sagging slattern who  has drenched her privy parts in perfume to drown the stench between her legs. Not that I am  complaining. With whores, the young ones smell much better, but the old ones know more tricks.”   “You would know more of that than I do.”  “Ah, of course. That brothel where we met, did you take it for a sept? Was that your virgin sister  squirming in your lap?”  That made him scowl. “Give that tongue of yours a rest unless you’d rather I tied it in a knot.”  Tyrion swallowed his retort. His lip was still fat and swollen from the last time he had pushed the  big knight too far. Hard hands and no sense of humor makes for a bad marriage. That much he’d learned  on the road from Selhorys. His thoughts went to his boot, to the mushrooms in the toe. His captor had  not searched him quite as thoroughly as he might have. There is always that escape. Cersei will not have  me alive, at least.  Farther south, signs of prosperity began to reappear. Abandoned buildings were seen less often,  the naked children vanished, the bravos in the doorways seemed more sumptuously dressed. A few of  the inns they passed actually looked like places where a man might sleep without fear of having his  throat slit. Lanterns swung from iron stanchions along the river road, swaying when the wind blew. The  streets grew broader, the buildings more imposing. Some were topped with great domes of colored  glass. In the gathering dusk, with fires lit beneath them, the domes glowed blue and red and green and  purple.  Even so, there was something in the air that made Tyrion uneasy. West of the Rhoyne, he knew,  the wharves of Volantis teemed with sailors, slaves, and traders, and the wineshops, inns, and brothels  all catered to them. East of the river, strangers from across the seas were seen less seldom. We are not  wanted here, the dwarf realized.  The first time they passed an elephant, Tyrion could not help but stare. There had been an  elephant in the menagerie at Lannisport when he had been a boy, but she had died when he was seven  … and this great grey behemoth looked to be twice her size.  Farther on, they fell in behind a smaller elephant, white as old bone and pulling an ornate cart.  “Is an oxcart an oxcart without an ox?” Tyrion asked his captor. When that sally got no response, he  lapsed back into silence, contemplating the rolling rump of the white dwarf elephant ahead of them.  Volantis was overrun with white dwarf elephants. As they drew closer to the Black Wall and the  crowded districts near the Long Bridge, they saw a dozen of them. Big grey elephants were not  uncommon either—huge beasts with castles on their backs. And in the half-light of evening the dung  carts had come out, attended by half-naked slaves whose task it was to shovel up the steaming piles left  by elephants both great and small. Swarms of flies followed the carts, so the dung slaves had flies  tattooed upon their cheeks, to mark them for what they were. There’s a trade for my sweet sister,  Tyrion mused. She’d look so pretty with a little shovel and flies tattooed on those sweet pink cheeks.  By then they had slowed to a crawl. The river road was thick with traffic, almost all of it flowing  south. The knight went with it, a log caught in a current. Tyrion eyed the passing throngs. Nine men of  every ten bore slave marks on their cheeks. “So many slaves … where are they all going?”   “The red priests light their nightfires at sunset. The High Priest will be speaking. I would avoid it  if I could, but to reach the Long Bridge we must pass the red temple.”  Three blocks later the street opened up before them onto a huge torchlit plaza, and there it  stood. Seven save me, that’s got to be three times the size of the Great Sept of Baelor. An enormity of  pillars, steps, buttresses, bridges, domes, and towers flowing into one another as if they had all been  chiseled from one collossal rock, the Temple of the Lord of Light loomed like Aegon’s High Hill. A  hundred hues of red, yellow, gold, and orange met and melded in the temple walls, dissolving one into  the other like clouds at sunset. Its slender towers twisted ever upward, frozen flames dancing as they  reached for the sky. Fire turned to stone. Huge nightfires burned beside the temple steps, and between  them the High Priest had begun to speak.  Benerro. The priest stood atop a red stone pillar, joined by a slender stone bridge to a lofty  terrace where the lesser priests and acolytes stood. The acolytes were clad in robes of pale yellow and  bright orange, priests and priestesses in red.  The great plaza before them was packed almost solid. Many and more of the worshipers were  wearing some scrap of red cloth pinned to their sleeves or tied around their brows. Every eye was on the  high priest, save theirs. “Make way,” the knight growled as his horse pushed through the throng. “Clear  a path.” The Volantenes gave way resentfully, with mutters and angry looks.  Benerro’s high voice carried well. Tall and thin, he had a drawn face and skin white as milk.  Flames had been tattooed across his cheeks and chin and shaven head to make a bright red mask that  crackled about his eyes and coiled down and around his lipless mouth. “Is that a slave tattoo?” asked  Tyrion.  The knight nodded. “The red temple buys them as children and makes them priests or temple  prostitutes or warriors. Look there.” He pointed at the steps, where a line of men in ornate armor and  orange cloaks stood before the temple’s doors, clasping spears with points like writhing flames. “The  Fiery Hand. The Lord of Light’s sacred soldiers, defenders of the temple.”  Fire knights. “And how many fingers does this hand have, pray?”  “One thousand. Never more, and never less. A new flame is kindled for every one that gutters  out.”  Benerro jabbed a finger at the moon, made a fist, spread his hands wide. When his voice rose in  a crescendo, flames leapt from his fingers with a sudden whoosh and made the crowd gasp. The priest  could trace fiery letters in the air as well. Valyrian glyphs. Tyrion recognized perhaps two in ten; one was  Doom, the other Darkness.  Shouts erupted from the crowd. Women were weeping and men were shaking their fists. I have  a bad feeling about this. The dwarf was reminded of the day Myrcella sailed for Dorne and the riot that  boiled up as they made their way back to the Red Keep.   Haldon Halfmaester had spoken of using the red priest to Young Griff’s advantage, Tyrion  recalled. Now that he had seen and heard the man himself, that struck him as a very bad idea. He hoped  that Griff had better sense. Some allies are more dangerous than enemies. But Lord Connington will need  to puzzle that one out for himself. I am like to be a head on a spike.  The priest was pointing at the Black Wall behind the temple, gesturing up at its parapets, where  a handful of armored guardsmen stood gazing down. “What is he saying?” Tyrion asked the knight.  “That Daenerys stands in peril. The dark eye has fallen upon her, and the minions of night are  plotting her destruction, praying to their false gods in temples of deceit … conspiring at betrayal with  godless outlanders …”  The hairs on the back of Tyrion’s neck began to prickle. Prince Aegon will find no friend here. The  red priest spoke of ancient prophecy, a prophecy that foretold the coming of a hero to deliver the world  from darkness. One hero. Not two. Daenerys has dragons, Aegon does not. The dwarf did not need to be  a prophet himself to foresee how Benerro and his followers might react to a second Targaryen. Griff will  see that too, surely, he thought, surprised to find how much he cared.  The knight had forced their way through most of the press at the back of the plaza, ignoring the  curses that were flung at them as they passed. One man stepped in front of them, but his captor gripped  the hilt of his longsword and drew it just far enough to show a foot of naked steel. The man melted  away, and all at once an alley opened up before them. The knight urged his mount to a trot, and they  left the crowd behind them. For a while Tyrion could still hear Benerro’s voice growing fainter at their  back and the roars his words provoked, sudden as thunder.  They came upon a stable. The knight dismounted, then hammered on the door until a haggard  slave with a horsehead on his cheek came running. The dwarf was pulled down roughly from the saddle  and lashed to a post whilst his captor woke the stable’s owner and haggled with him over the price of  his horse and saddle. Cheaper to sell a horse than to ship one half across the world. Tyrion sensed a ship  in his immediate future. Perhaps he was a prophet after all.  When the dickering was done, the knight slung his weapons, shield, and saddlebag over his  shoulder and asked for directions to the nearest smithy. That proved shuttered too, but opened quick  enough at the knight’s shout. The smith gave Tyrion a squint, then nodded and accepted a fistful of  coins. “Come here,” the knight told his prisoner. He drew his dagger and slit Tyrion’s bonds apart. “My  thanks,” said the dwarf as he rubbed his wrists, but the knight only laughed and said, “Save your  gratitude for someone who deserves it, Imp. You will not like this next bit.”  He was not wrong.  The manacles were black iron, thick and heavy, each weighing a good two pounds, if the dwarf  was any judge. The chains added even more weight. “I must be more fearsome than I knew,” Tyrion  confessed as the last links were hammered closed. Each blow sent a shock up his arm almost to the  shoulder. “Or were you afraid that I would dash away on these stunted little legs of mine?”   The ironsmith did not so much as look up from his work, but the knight chuckled darkly. “It’s  your mouth that concerns me, not your legs. In fetters, you’re a slave. No one will listen to a word you  say, not even those who speak the tongue of Westeros.”  “There’s no need for this,” Tyrion protested. “I will be a good little prisoner, I will, I will.”  “Prove it, then, and shut your mouth.”  So he bowed his head and bit his tongue as the chains were fixed, wrist to wrist, wrist to ankle,  ankle to ankle. These bloody things weigh more than I do. Still, at least he drew breath. His captor could  just as easily have cut his head off. That was all Cersei required, after all. Not striking it off straightaway  had been his captor’s first mistake. There is half a world between Volantis and King’s Landing, and much  and more can happen along the way, ser.  The rest of the way they went by foot, Tyrion clanking and clattering as he struggled to keep up  with his captor’s long, impatient strides. Whenever he threatened to fall behind, the knight would seize  his fetters and yank them roughly, sending the dwarf stumbling and hopping along beside him. It could  be worse. He could be urging me along with a whip.  Volantis straddled one mouth of the Rhoyne where the river kissed the sea, its two halves joined  by the Long Bridge. The oldest, richest part of the city was east of the river, but sellswords, barbarians,  and other uncouth outlanders were not welcome there, so they must needs cross over to the west.  The gateway to the Long Bridge was a black stone arch carved with sphinxes, manticores,  dragons, and creatures stranger still. Beyond the arch stretched the great span that the Valyrians had  built at the height of their glory, its fused stone roadway supported by massive piers. The road was just  wide enough for two carts to pass abreast, so whenever a wagon headed west passed one going east,  both had to slow to a crawl.  It was well they were afoot. A third of the way out, a wagon laden with melons had gotten its  wheels tangled with one piled high with silken carpets and brought all wheeled traffic to a halt. Much of  the foot traffic had stopped as well, to watch the drivers curse and scream at one another, but the  knight grabbed hold of Tyrion’s chain and bulled a path through the throng for both of them. In the  middle of the press, a boy tried to reach into his purse, but a hard elbow put an end to that and spread  the thief’s bloody nose across half his face.  Buildings rose to either side of them: shops and temples, taverns and inns, cyvasse parlors and  brothels. Most were three or four stories tall, each floor overhanging the one beneath it. Their top floors  almost kissed. Crossing the bridge felt like passing through a torchlit tunnel. Along the span were shops  and stalls of every sort; weavers and lacemakers displayed their wares cheek by jowl with glassblowers,  candlemakers, and fishwives selling eels and oysters. Each goldsmith had a guard at his door, and every  spicer had two, for their goods were twice as valuable. Here and there, between the shops, a traveler  might catch a glimpse of the river he was crossing. To the north the Rhoyne was a broad black ribbon   bright with stars, five times as wide as the Blackwater Rush at King’s Landing. South of the bridge the  river opened up to embrace the briny sea.  At the bridge’s center span, the severed hands of thieves and cutpurses hung like strings of  onions from iron stanchions along the roadway. Three heads were on display as well—two men and a  woman, their crimes scrawled on tablets underneath them. A pair of spearmen attended them, clad in  polished helms and shirts of silver mail. Across their cheeks were tiger stripes as green as jade. From  time to time the guards waved their spears to chase away the kestrels, gulls, and carrion crows paying  court to the deceased. The birds returned to the heads within moments.  “What did they do?” Tyrion inquired innocently.  The knight glanced at the inscriptions. “The woman was a slave who raised her hand to her  mistress. The older man was accused of fomenting rebellion and spying for the dragon queen.”  “And the young one?”  “Killed his father.”  Tyrion gave the rotting head a second look. Why, it almost looks as if those lips are smiling.  Farther on, the knight paused briefly to consider a jeweled tiara displayed upon a bed of purple  velvet. He passed that by, but a few steps on he stopped again to haggle over a pair of gloves at a  leatherworker’s stall. Tyrion was grateful for the respites. The headlong pace had left him puffing, and  his wrists were chafed raw from the manacles.  From the far end of the Long Bridge, it was only a short walk through the teeming waterfront  districts of the west bank, down torchlit streets crowded with sailors, slaves, and drunken merrymakers.  Once an elephant lumbered past with a dozen half-naked slave girls waving from the castle on its back,  teasing passersby with glimpses of their breasts and crying, “Malaquo, Malaquo.” They made such an  entrancing sight that Tyrion almost waddled right into the steaming pile of dung the elephant had left to  mark its passage. He was saved at the last instant when the knight snatched him aside, yanking on his  chain so hard it made him reel and stumble.  “How much farther?” the dwarf asked. “Just there. Fishmonger’s Square.”  Their destination proved to be the Merchant’s House, a four-story monstrosity that squatted  amongst the warehouses, brothels, and taverns of the waterside like some enormous fat man  surrounded by children. Its common room was larger than the great halls of half the castles in Westeros,  a dim-lit maze of a place with a hundred private alcoves and hidden nooks whose blackened beams and  cracked ceilings echoed to the din of sailors, traders, captains, money changers, shippers, and slavers,  lying, cursing, and cheating each other in half a hundred different tongues.  Tyrion approved the choice of hostelry. Soon or late the Shy Maid must reach Volantis. This was  the city’s biggest inn, first choice for shippers, captains, and merchantmen. A lot of business was done in   that cavernous warren of a common room. He knew enough of Volantis to know that. Let Griff turn up  here with Duck and Haldon, and he would be free again soon enough.  Meanwhile, he would be patient. His chance would come.  The rooms upstairs proved rather less than grand, however, particularly the cheap ones up on  the fourth floor. Wedged into a corner of the building beneath a sloping roof, the bedchamber his  captor had engaged featured a low ceiling, a sagging feather bed with an unpleasant odor, and a slanting  wood-plank floor that reminded Tyrion of his sojourn at the Eyrie. At least this room has walls. It had  windows too; those were its chief amenity, along with the iron ring set in the wall, so useful for chaining  up one’s slaves. His captor paused only long enough to light a tallow candle before securing Tyrion’s  chains to the ring.  “Must you?” the dwarf protested, rattling feebly. “Where am I going to go, out the window?”  “You might.”  “We are four floors up, and I cannot fly.”  “You can fall. I want you alive.”  Aye, but why? Cersei is not like to care. Tyrion rattled his chains. “I know who you are, ser.” It  had not been hard to puzzle out. The bear on his surcoat, the arms on his shield, the lost lordship he had  mentioned. “I know what you are. And if you know who I am, you also know that I was the King’s Hand  and sat in council with the Spider. Would it interest you to know that it was the eunuch who dispatched  me on this journey?” Him and Jaime, but I’ll leave my brother out of it. “I am as much his creature as you  are. We ought not be at odds.”  That did not please the knight. “I took the Spider’s coin, I’ll not deny it, but I was never his  creature. And my loyalties lie elsewhere now.”  “With Cersei? More fool you. All my sister requires is my head, and you have a fine sharp sword.  Why not end this farce now and spare us both?”  The knight laughed. “Is this some dwarf’s trick? Beg for death in hopes I’ll let you live?” He went  to the door. “I’ll bring you something from the kitchens.”  “How kind of you. I’ll wait here.”  “I know you will.” Yet when the knight left, he locked the door behind him with a heavy iron key.  The Merchant’s House was famous for its locks. As secure as a gaol, the dwarf thought bitterly, but at  least there are those windows.  Tyrion knew that the chances of his escaping his chains were little and less, but even so, he felt  obliged to try. His efforts to slip a hand through the manacle served only to scrap off more skin and  leave his wrist slick with blood, and all his tugging or twisting could not pull the iron ring from the wall.   Bugger this, he thought, slumping back as far as his chains would allow. His legs had begun to cramp.  This was going to be a hellishly uncomfortable night. The first of many, I do not doubt.  The room was stifling, so the knight had opened the shutters to let in a cross breeze. Cramped  into a corner of the building under the eaves, the chamber was fortunate in having two windows. One  looked toward the Long Bridge and the black-walled heart of Old Volantis across the river. The other  opened on the square below. Fishermonger’s Square, Mormont called it. As tight as the chains were,  Tyrion found he could see out the latter by leaning sideways and letting the iron ring support his weight.  Not as long a fall as the one from Lysa Arryn’s sky cells, but it would leave me just as dead. Perhaps if I  were drunk …  Even at this hour the square was crowded, with sailors roistering, whores prowling for custom,  and merchants going about their business. A red priestess scurried past, attended by a dozen acolytes  with torches, their robes whisking about their ankles. Elsewhere a pair of cyvasse players waged war  outside a tavern. A slave stood beside their table, holding a lantern over the board. Tyrion could hear a  woman singing. The words were strange, the tune was soft and sad. If I knew what she was singing, I  might cry. Closer to hand, a crowd was gathering around a pair of jugglers throwing flaming torches at  each other.  His captor returned shortly, carrying two tankards and a roasted duck. He kicked the door shut,  ripped the duck in two, and tossed half of it to Tyrion. He would have snatched it from the air, but his  chains brought him up short when he tried to lift his arms. Instead the bird struck his temple and slid hot  and greasy down his face, and he had to hunker down and stretch for it with fetters clanking. He got it  on the third try and tore into it happily with his teeth. “Some ale to wash this down?”  Mormont handed him a tankard. “Most of Volantis is getting drunk, why not you?”  The ale was sweet as well. It tasted of fruit. Tyrion drank a healthy swallow and belched happily.  The tankard was pewter, very heavy. Empty it and fling it at his head, he thought. If I am lucky, it might  crack his skull. If I’m very lucky, it will miss, and he’ll beat me to death with his fists. He took another  gulp. “Is this some holy day?”  “Third day of their elections. They last for ten. Ten days of madness. Torchlight marches,  speeches, mummers and minstrels and dancers, bravos fighting death duels for the honor of their  candidates, elephants with the names of would-be triarchs painted on their sides. Those jugglers are  performing for Methyso.”  “Remind me to vote for someone else.” Tyrion licked grease from his fingers. Below, the crowd  was flinging coins at the jugglers. “Do all these would-be triarchs provide mummer shows?”  “They do whatever they think will win them votes,” said Mormont. “Food, drink, spectacle …  Alios has sent a hundred pretty slave girls out into the streets to lie with voters.”  “I’m for him,” Tyrion decided. “Bring me a slave girl.”   “They’re for freeborn Volantenes with enough property to vote. Precious few voters west of the  river.”  “And this goes on for ten days?” Tyrion laughed. “I might enjoy that, though three kings is two  too many. I am trying to imagine ruling the Seven Kingdoms with my sweet sister and brave brother  beside me. One of us would kill the other two inside a year. I am surprised these triarchs don’t do the  same.”  “A few have tried. Might be the Volantenes are the clever ones and us Westerosi the fools.  Volantis has known her share of follies, but she’s never suffered a boy triarch. Whenever a madman’s  been elected, his colleagues restrain him until his year has run its course. Think of the dead who might  still live if Mad Aerys only had two fellow kings to share the rule.”  Instead he had my father, Tyrion thought. “Some in the Free Cities think that we’re all savages  on our side of the narrow sea,” the knight went on. “The ones who don’t think that we’re children,  crying out for a father’s strong hand.”  “Or a mother’s?” Cersei will love that. Especially when he presents her with my head. “You seem  to know this city well.”  “I spent the best part of a year here.” The knight sloshed the dregs at the bottom of his tankard.  “When Stark drove me into exile, I fled to Lys with my second wife. Braavos would have suited me  better, but Lynesse wanted someplace warm. Instead of serving the Braavosi I fought them on the  Rhoyne, but for every silver I earned my wife spent ten. By the time I got back to Lys, she had taken a  lover, who told me cheerfully that I would be enslaved for debt unless I gave her up and left the city.  That was how I came to Volantis … one step ahead of slavery, owning nothing but my sword and the  clothes upon my back.”  “And now you want to run home.”  The knight drained the last of his ale. “On the morrow I’ll find us a ship. The bed is mine. You can  have whatever piece of floor your chains will let you reach. Sleep if you can. If not, count your crimes.  That should see you through till the morning.”  You have your crimes to answer for, Jorah Mormont, the dwarf thought, but it seemed wiser to  keep that thought to himself.  Ser Jorah hung his sword belt on a bedpost, kicked off his boots, pulled his chain mail over his  head, and stripped out of his wool and leather and sweat-stained undertunic to reveal a scarred, brawny  torso covered with dark hair. If I could skin him, I could sell that pelt for a fur cloak, Tyrion thought as  Mormont tumbled into the slightly smelly comfort of his sagging feather bed.  In no time at all the knight was snoring, leaving his prize alone with his chains. With both  windows open wide, the light of the waning moon spilled across the bedchamber. Sounds drifted up   from the square below: snatches of drunken song, the yowling of a cat in heat, the far-off ring of steel  on steel. Someone’s about to die, thought Tyrion.  His wrist was throbbing where he’d torn the skin, and his fetters made it impossible for him to  sit, let alone stretch out. The best he could do was twist sideways to lean against the wall, and before  long he began to lose all feeling in his hands. When he moved to relieve the strain, sensation came  flooding back as pain. He had to grind his teeth to keep from screaming. He wondered how much his  father had hurt when the quarrel punched through his groin, what Shae had felt as he twisted the chain  around her lying throat, what Tysha had been feeling as they raped her. His sufferings were nothing  compared to their own, but that did not make him hurt any less. Just make it stop.  Ser Jorah had rolled onto one side, so all that Tyrion could see of him was a broad, hairy,  muscular back. Even if I could slip these chains, I’d need to climb over him to reach his sword belt.  Perhaps if I could ease the dagger loose … Or else he could try for the key, unlock the door, creep down  the stairs and through the common room … and go where? I have no friends, no coin, I do not even  speak the local tongue.  Exhaustion finally overwhelmed his pains, and Tyrion drifted off into a fitful sleep. But every  time another cramp took root inside his calf and twisted, the dwarf would cry out in his sleep, trembling  in his chains. He woke with every muscle aching, to find morning streaming through the windows bright  and golden as the lion of Lannister. Below he could hear the cries of fishmongers and the rumble of  iron-rimmed wheels on cobblestones.  Jorah Mormont was standing over him. “If I take you off the ring, will you do as you’re told?”  “Will it involve dancing? I might find dancing difficult. I cannot feel my legs. They may have  fallen off. Elsewise, I am your creature. On my honor as a Lannister.”  “The Lannisters have no honor.” Ser Jorah loosed his chains anyway. Tyrion took two wobbly  steps and fell. The blood rushing back into his hands brought tears to his eyes. He bit his lip and said,  “Wherever we’re going, you will need to roll me there.”  Instead the big knight carried him, hoisting him by the chain between his wrists.  The common room of the Merchant’s House was a dim labyrinth of alcoves and grottoes built  around a central courtyard where a trellis of flowering vines threw intricate patterns across the  flagstone floor and green and purple moss grew between the stones. Slave girls scurried through light  and shadow, bearing flagons of ale and wine and some iced green drink that smelled of mint. One table  in twenty was occupied at this hour of the morning.  One of those was occupied by a dwarf. Clean-shaved and pink-cheeked, with a mop of chestnut  hair, a heavy brow, and a squashed nose, he perched on a high stool with a wooden spoon in hand,  contemplating a bowl of purplish gruel with red-rimmed eyes. Ugly little bastard, Tyrion thought.   The other dwarf felt his stare. When he raised his head and saw Tyrion, the spoon slipped from  his hand.  “He saw me,” Tyrion warned Mormont. “What of it?”  “He knows me. Who I am.”  “Should I stuff you in a sack, so no one will see you?” The knight touched the hilt of his  longsword. “If he means to try and take you, he is welcome to try.”  Welcome to die, you mean, thought Tyrion. What threat could he pose to a big man like you? He  is only a dwarf.  Ser Jorah claimed a table in a quiet corner and ordered food and drink. They broke their fast  with warm soft flatbread, pink fish roe, honey sausage, and fried locusts, washed down with a  bittersweet black ale. Tyrion ate like a man half-starved. “You have a healthy appetite this morning,” the  knight observed.  “I’ve heard the food in hell is wretched.” Tyrion glanced at the door, where a man had just come  in: tall and stooped, his pointed beard dyed a splotchy purple. Some Tyroshi trader. A gust of sound  came with him from outside; the cries of gulls, a woman’s laughter, the voices of the fishmongers. For  half a heartbeat he thought he glimpsed Illyrio Mopatis, but it was only one of those white dwarf  elephants passing the front door.  Mormont spread some fish roe across a slice of flatbread and took a bite. “Are you expecting  someone?”  Tyrion shrugged. “You never know who the wind might blow in. My one true love, my father’s  ghost, a duck.” He popped a locust into his mouth and crunched it. “Not bad. For a bug.”  “Last night the talk here was all of Westeros. Some exiled lord has hired the Golden Company to  win back his lands for him. Half the captains in Volantis are racing upriver to Volon Therys to offer him  their ships.”  Tyrion had just swallowed another locust. He almost choked on it. Is he mocking me? How much  could he know of Griff and Aegon? “Bugger,” he said. “I meant to hire the Golden Company myself, to  win me Casterly Rock.” Could this be some ploy of Griff’s, false reports deliberately spread? Unless …  Could the pretty princeling have swallowed the bait? Turned them west instead of east, abandoning his  hopes of wedding Queen Daenerys? Abandoning the dragons … would Griff allow that? “I’ll gladly hire  you as well, ser. My father’s seat is mine by rights. Swear me your sword, and once I win it back I’ll  drown you in gold.”  “I saw a man drowned in gold once. It was not a pretty sight. If you ever get my sword, it will b e  through your bowels.”   “A sure cure for constipation,” said Tyrion. “Just ask my father.” He reached for his tankard and  took a slow swallow, to help conceal whatever might be showing on his face. It had to be a stratagem,  designed to lull Volantene suspicions. Get the men aboard with this false pretext and seize the ships  when the fleet is out to sea. Is that Griff’s plan? It might work. The Golden Company was ten thousand  strong, seasoned and disciplined. None of them seamen, though. Griff will need to keep a sword at every  throat, and should they come on Slaver’s Bay and need to fight …  The serving girl returned. “The widow will see you next, noble ser. Have you brought a gift for  her?”  “Yes. Thank you.” Ser Jorah slipped a coin into the girl’s palm and sent her on her way.  Tyrion frowned. “Whose widow is this?”  “The widow of the waterfront. East of the Rhoyne they still call her Vogarro’s whore, though  never to her face.”  The dwarf was not enlightened. “And Vogarro was … ?”  “An elephant, seven times a triarch, very rich, a power on the docks. Whilst other men built the  ships and sailed them, he built piers and storehouses, brokered cargoes, changed money, insured  shipowners against the hazards of the sea. He dealt in slaves as well. When he grew besotted with one  of them, a bedslave trained at Yunkai in the way of seven sighs, it was a great scandal … and a greater  scandal when he freed her and took her for his wife. After he died, she carried on his ventures. No  freedman may dwell within the Black Wall, so she was compelled to sell Vogarro’s manse. She took up  residence at the Merchant’s House. That was thirty-two years ago, and she remains here to this day.  That’s her behind you, back by the courtyard, holding court at her customary table. No, don’t look.  There’s someone with her now. When he’s done, it will be our turn.”  “And this old harridan will help you how?”  Ser Jorah stood. “Watch and see. He’s leaving.”  Tyrion hopped down off his chair with a rattle of iron. This should be enlightening.  There was something vulpine about the way the woman sat in her corner by the courtyard,  something reptilian about her eyes. Her white hair was so thin that the pink of her scalp showed  through. Under one eye she still bore faint scars where a knife had cut away her tears. The remnants of  her morning meal littered the table—sardine heads, olive pits, chunks of flatbread. Tyrion did not fail to  note how well chosen her “customary table” was; solid stone at her back, a leafy alcove to one side for  entrances and exits, a perfect view of the inn’s front door, yet so steeped in shadow that she herself was  nigh invisible.   The sight of him made the old woman smile. “A dwarf,” she purred, in a voice as sinister as it  was soft. She spoke the Common Tongue with only a trace of accent. “Volantis has been overrun with  dwarfs of late, it seems. Does this one do tricks?”  Yes, Tyrion wanted to say. Give me a crossbow, and I’ll show you my favorite. “No,” Ser Jorah  answered.  “A pity. I once had a monkey who could perform all sorts of clever tricks. Your dwarf reminds me  of him. Is he a gift?”  “No. I brought you these.” Ser Jorah produced his pair of gloves, and slapped them down on the  table beside the other gifts the widow had received this morning: a silver goblet, an ornate fan carved of  jade leaves so thin they were translucent, and an ancient bronze dagger marked with runes. Beside such  treasures the gloves looked cheap and tawdry.  “Gloves for my poor old wrinkled hands. How nice.” The widow made no move to touch them.  “I bought them on the Long Bridge.”  “A man can buy most anything on the Long Bridge. Gloves, slaves, monkeys.” The years had bent  her spine and put a crone’s hump upon her back, but the widow’s eyes were bright and black. “Now tell  this old widow how she may be of service to you.”  “We need swift passage to Meereen.”  One word. Tyrion Lannister’s world turned upside down.  One word. Meereen. Or had he misheard?  One word. Meereen, he said Meereen, he’s taking me to Meereen. Meereen meant life. Or hope  for life, at least.  “Why come to me?” the widow said. “I own no ships.”  “You have many captains in your debt.”  Deliver me to the queen, he says. Aye, but which queen? He isn’t selling me to Cersei. He’s giving  me to Daenerys Targaryen. That’s why he hasn’t hacked my head off. We’re going east, and Griff and his  prince are going west, the bloody fools.  Oh, it was all too much. Plots within plots, but all roads lead down the dragon’s gullet. A guffaw  burst from his lips, and suddenly Tyrion could not stop laughing.  “Your dwarf is having a fit,” the widow observed. “My dwarf will be quiet, or I’ll see him  gagged.”  Tyrion covered his mouth with his hands. Meereen!   The widow of the waterfront decided to ignore him. “Shall we have a drink?” she asked. Dust  motes floated in the air as a serving girl filled two green glass cups for Ser Jorah and the widow. Tyrion’s  throat was dry, but no cup was poured for him. The widow took a sip, rolled the wine round her mouth,  swallowed. “All the other exiles are sailing west, or so these old ears have heard. And all those captains  in my debt are falling over one another to take them there and leach a little gold from the coffers of the  Golden Company. Our noble triarchs have pledged a dozen warships to the cause, to see the fleet safely  as far as the Stepstones. Even old Doniphos has given his assent. Such a glorious adventure. And yet you  would go the other way, ser.”  “My business is in the east.”  “And what business is that, I wonder? Not slaves, the silver queen has put an end to that. She  has closed the fighting pits as well, so it cannot be a taste for blood. What else could Meereen offer to a  Westerosi knight? Bricks? Olives? Dragons? Ah, there it is.” The old woman’s smile turned feral. “I have  heard it said that the silver queen feeds them with the flesh of infants while she herself bathes in the  blood of virgin girls and takes a different lover every night.”  Ser Jorah’s mouth had hardened. “The Yunkai’i are pouring poison in your ears. My lady should  not believe such filth.”  “I am no lady, but even Vogarro’s whore knows the taste of falsehood. This much is true, though  … the dragon queen has enemies … Yunkai, New Ghis, Tolos, Qarth … aye, and Volantis, soon enough.  You would travel to Meereen? Just wait a while, ser. Swords will be wanted soon enough, when the  warships bend their oars eastward to bring down the silver queen. Tigers love to bare their claws, and  even elephants will kill if threatened. Malaquo hungers for a taste of glory, and Nyessos owes much of  his wealth to the slave trade. Let Alios or Parquello or Belicho gain the triarchy, and the fleets will sail.”  Ser Jorah scowled. “If Doniphos is returned …”  “Vogarro will be returned first, and my sweet lord has been dead these thirty years.”  Behind them, some sailor was bellowing loudly. “They call this ale? Fuck. A monkey could piss  better ale.”  “And you would drink it,” another voice replied.  Tyrion twisted around for a look, hoping against hope that it was Duck and Haldon he was  hearing. Instead he saw two strangers … and the dwarf, who was standing a few feet away staring at him  intently. He seemed somehow familiar.  The widow sipped daintily at her wine. “Some of the first elephants were women,” she said,  “the ones who brought the tigers down and ended the old wars. Trianna was returned four times. That  was three hundred years ago, alas. Volantis has had no female triarch since, though some women have  the vote. Women of good birth who dwell in ancient palaces behind the Black Walls, not creatures such   as me. The Old Blood will have their dogs and children voting before any freedman. No, it will be  Belicho, or perhaps Alios, but either way it will be war. Or so they think.”  “And what do you think?” Ser Jorah asked.  Good, thought Tyrion. The right question. “Oh, I think it will be war as well, but not the war they  want.” The old woman leaned forward, her black eyes gleaming. “I think that red R’hllor has more  worshipers in this city than all the other gods together. Have you heard Benerro preach?”  “Last night.”  “Benerro can see the morrow in his flames,” the widow said. “Triarch Malaquo tried to hire the  Golden Company, did you know? He meant to clean out the red temple and put Benerro to the sword.  He dare not use tiger cloaks. Half of them worship the Lord of Light as well. Oh, these are dire days in  Old Volantis, even for wrinkled old widows. But not half so dire as in Meereen, I think. So tell me, ser …  why do you seek the silver queen?”  “That is my concern. I can pay for our passage and pay well. I have the silver.”  Fool, thought Tyrion. It’s not coin she wants, it’s respect. Haven’t you heard a word she’s said?  He glanced back over his shoulder again. The dwarf had moved closer to their table. And he seemed to  have a knife in his hand. The hairs on the back of Tyrion’s neck began to prickle.  “Keep your silver. I have gold. And spare me your black looks, ser. I am too old to be frightened  of a scowl. You are a hard man, I see, and no doubt skilled with that long sword at your side, but this is  my realm. Let me crook a finger and you may find yourself traveling to Meereen chained to an oar in the  belly of a galley.” She lifted her jade fan and opened it. There was a rustle of leaves, and a man slid from  the overgrown archway to her left. His face was a mass of scars, and in one hand he held a sword, short  and heavy as a cleaver. “Seek the widow of the waterfront, someone told you, but they should have also  warned you, beware the widow’s sons. It is such a sweet morning, though, I shall ask again. Why would  you seek Daenerys Targaryen, whom half the world wants dead?”  Jorah Mormont’s face was dark with anger, but he answered. “To serve her. Defend her. Die for  her, if need be.”  That made the widow laugh. “You want to rescue her, is that the way of it? From more enemies  than I can name, with swords beyond count … this is what you’d have the poor widow believe? That you  are a true and chivalrous Westerosi knight crossing half the world to come to the aid of this … well, she  is no maiden, though she may still be fair.” She laughed again. “Do you think your dwarf will please her?  Will she bathe in his blood, do you think, or content herself with striking off his head?”  Ser Jorah hesitated. “The dwarf is—”   “—I know who the dwarf is, and what he is.” Her black eyes turned to Tyrion, hard as stone.  “Kinslayer, kingslayer, murderer, turncloak. Lannister.” She made the last a curse. “What do you plan to  offer the dragon queen, little man?”  My hate, Tyrion wanted to say. Instead he spread his hands as far as the fetters would allow.  “Whatever she would have of me. Sage counsel, savage wit, a bit of tumbling. My cock, if she desires it.  My tongue, if she does not. I will lead her armies or rub her feet, as she desires. And the only reward I  ask is I might be allowed to rape and kill my sister.”  That brought the smile back to the old woman’s face. “This one at least is honest,” she  announced, “but you, ser … I have known a dozen Westerosi knights and a thousand adventurers of the  same ilk, but none so pure as you would paint yourself. Men are beasts, selfish and brutal. However  gentle the words, there are always darker motives underneath. I do not trust you, ser.” She flicked them  off with her fan, as if they were no more than flies buzzing about her head. “If you want to get to  Meereen, swim. I have no help to give you.”  Then seven hells broke out at once.  Ser Jorah started to rise, the widow snapped her fan closed, her scarred man slid out of the  shadows … and behind them a girl screamed. Tyrion spun just in time to see the dwarf rushing toward  him. She’s a girl, he realized all at once, a girl dressed up in man’s clothes. And she means to gut me with  that knife.  For half a heartbeat Ser Jorah, the widow, and the scarred man stood still as stone. Idlers  watched from nearby tables, sipping ale and wine, but no one moved to interfere. Tyrion had to move  both hands at once, but his chains had just enough give for him to reach the flagon on the table. He  closed his fist around it, spun, dashed its contents into the face of the charging dwarf girl, then threw  himself to one side to avoid her knife. The flagon shattered underneath him as the floor came up to  smack him in the head. Then the girl was on him once again. Tyrion rolled on one side as she buried the  knife blade in the floorboards, yanked it free, raised it again …  … and suddenly she was rising off the floor, legs kicking wildly as she struggled in Ser Jorah’s  grasp. “No!” she wailed, in the Common Tongue of Westeros. “Let go!” Tyrion heard her tunic rip as she  fought to free herself.  Mormont had her by the collar with one hand. With the other he wrenched the dagger from her  grasp. “Enough.”  The landlord made his appearance then, a cudgel in his hand. When he saw the broken flagon,  he uttered a blistering curse and demanded to know what had happened here. “Dwarf fight,” replied  the Tyroshi with the purple beard, chuckling.  Tyrion blinked up at the dripping girl twisting in the air. “Why?” he demanded. “What did I ever  do to you?”   “They killed him.” All the fight went out of her at that. She hung limply in Mormont’s grasp as  her eyes filled with tears. “My brother. They took him and they killed him.”  “Who killed him?” asked Mormont. “Sailors. Sailors from the Seven Kingdoms. There were five  of them, drunk. They saw us jousting in the square and followed us. When they realized I was a girl they  let me go, but they took my brother and killed him. They cut his head off.”  Tyrion felt a sudden shock of recognition. They saw us jousting in the square. He knew who the  girl was then. “Did you ride the pig?” he asked her. “Or the dog?”  “The dog,” she sobbed. “Oppo always rode the pig.”  The dwarfs from Joffrey’s wedding. It was their show that had started all the trouble that night.  How strange, to encounter them again half a world away. Though perhaps not so strange as that. If they  had half the wits of their pig, they would have fled King’s Landing the night Joff died, before Cersei could  assign them some share of blame in her son’s death. “Let her down, ser,” he told Ser Jorah Mormont.  “She won’t do us any harm.”  Ser Jorah dumped the dwarf girl on the floor. “I am sorry for your brother … but we had no part  in his murder.”  “He did.” The girl pushed herself to her knees, clutching her torn, wine-drenched tunic to small,  pale breasts. “It was him they wanted. They thought Oppo was him.” The girl was weeping, begging for  help from anyone who would listen. “He should die, the way my poor brother died. Please. Someone  help me. Someone kill him.” The landlord seized her roughly by one arm and wrenched her back to her  feet, shouting in Volantene, demanding to know who was going to pay for this damage.  The widow of the waterfront gave Mormont a cool look. “Knights defend the weak and protect  the innocent, they say. And I am the fairest maid in all Volantis.” Her laugh was full of scorn. “What do  they call you, child?”  “Penny.”  The old woman called out to the landlord in the tongue of Old Volantis. Tyrion knew enough to  understand that she was telling him to take the dwarf girl up to her rooms, give her wine, and find some  clothes for her to wear.  When they were gone, the widow studied Tyrion, her black eyes shining. “Monsters should be  larger, it seems to me. You are worth a lordship back in Westeros, little man. Here, I fear, your worth is  somewhat less. But I think I had best help you after all. Volantis is no safe place for dwarfs, it seems.”  “You are too kind.” Tyrion gave her his sweetest smile. “Perhaps you would remove these  charming iron bracelets as well? This monster has but half a nose, and it itches most abominably. The  chains are too short for me to scratch it. I’ll make you a gift of them, and gladly.”   “How generous. But I have worn iron in my time, and now I find that I prefer gold and silver. And  sad to say, this is Volantis, where fetters and chains are cheaper than day-old bread and it is forbidden  to help a slave escape.”  “I’m no slave.”  “Every man ever taken by slavers sings that same sad song. I dare not help you … here.” She  leaned forward again. “Two days from now, the cog Selaesori Qhoran will set sail for Qarth by way of  New Ghis, carrying tin and iron, bales of wool and lace, fifty Myrish carpets, a corpse pickled in brine,  twenty jars of dragon peppers, and a red priest. Be on her when she sails.”  “We will,” said Tyrion, “and thank you.”  Ser Jorah frowned. “Qarth is not our destination.”  “She will never reach Qarth. Benerro has seen it in his fires.” The crone smiled a vulpine smile.  “As you say.” Tyrion grinned. “If I were Volantene, and free, and had the blood, you’d have my  vote for triarch, my lady.”  “I am no lady,” the widow replied, “just Vogarro’s whore. You want to be gone from here before  the tigers come. Should you reach your queen, give her a message from the slaves of Old Volantis.” She  touched the faded scar upon her wrinkled cheek, where her tears had been cut away. “Tell her we are  waiting. Tell her to come soon.”  The Selaesori Qhoran was seven days from Volantis when Penny finally emerged from her cabin,  creeping up on deck like some timid woodland creature emerging from a long winter’s sleep.  It was dusk and the red priest had lit his nightfire in the great iron brazier amidships as the crew  gathered round to pray. Moqorro’s voice was a bass drum that seemed to boom from somewhere deep  within his massive torso. “We thank you for your sun that keeps us warm,” he prayed. “We thank you for  your stars that watch over us as we sail this cold black sea.” A huge man, taller than Ser Jorah and wide  enough to make two of him, the priest wore scarlet robes embroidered at sleeve and hem and collar  with orange satin flames. His skin was black as pitch, his hair as white as snow; the flames tattooed  across his cheeks and brow yellow and orange. His iron staff was as tall as he was and crowned with a  dragon’s head; when he stamped its butt upon the deck, the dragon’s maw spat crackling green flame.  His guardsmen, five slave warriors of the Fiery Hand, led the responses. They chanted in the  tongue of Old Volantis, but Tyrion had heard the prayers enough to grasp the essence. Light our fire and  protect us from the dark, blah blah, light our way and keep us toasty warm, the night is dark and full of  terrors, save us from the scary things, and blah blah blah some more.  He knew better than to voice such thoughts aloud. Tyrion Lannister had no use for any god, but  on this ship it was wise to show a certain respect for red R’hllor. Jorah Mormont had removed Tyron’s  chains and fetters once they were safely under way, and the dwarf did not wish to give him cause to clap  them on again.  The Selaesori Qhoran was a wallowing tub of five hundred tons, with a deep hold, high castles  fore and aft, and a single mast between. At her forecastle stood a grotesque figurehead, some  worm-eaten wooden eminence with a constipated look and a scroll tucked up under one arm. Tyrion  had never seen an uglier ship. Her crew was no prettier. Her captain, a mean-mouthed, flinty,  kettle-bellied man with close-set, greedy eyes, was a bad cyvasse player and a worse loser. Under him  served four mates, freedmen all, and fifty slaves bound to the ship, each with a crude version of the  cog’s figurehead tattooed upon one cheek. No-Nose, the sailors liked to call Tyrion, no matter how many  times he told them his name was Hugor Hill.  Three of the mates and more than three-quarters of the crew were fervent worshipers of the  Lord of Light. Tyrion was less certain about the captain, who always emerged for the evening prayers but   took no other part in them. But Moqorro was the true master of the Selaesori Qhoran, at least for this  voyage.  “Lord of Light, bless your slave Moqorro, and light his way in the dark places of the world,” the  red priest boomed. “And defend your righteous slave Benerro. Grant him courage. Grant him wisdom.  Fill his heart with fire.”  That was when Tyrion noticed Penny, watching the mummery from the steep wooden stair that  led down beneath the sterncastle. She stood on one of the lower steps, so only the top of her head was  visible. Beneath her hood her eyes shone big and white in the light of the nightfire. She had her dog with  her, the big grey hound she rode in the mock jousts.  “My lady,” Tyrion called softly. In truth, she was no lady, but he could not bring himself to  mouth that silly name of hers, and he was not about to call her girl or dwarf.  She cringed back. “I … I did not see you.”  “Well, I am small.”  “I … I was unwell …” Her dog barked.  Sick with grief, you mean. “If I can be of help …”  “No.” And quick as that she was gone again, retreating back below to the cabin she shared with  her dog and sow. Tyrion could not fault her. The crew of the Selaesori Qhoran had been pleased enough  when he first came on board; a dwarf was good luck, after all. His head had been rubbed so often and so  vigorously that it was a wonder he wasn’t bald. But Penny had met with a more mixed reaction. She  might be a dwarf, but she was also a woman, and women were bad luck aboard ship. For every man  who tried to rub her head, there were three who muttered maledictions under their breath when she  went by.  And the sight of me can only be salt in her wound. They hacked off her brother’s head in the  hope that it was mine, yet here I sit like some bloody gargoyle, offering empty consolations. If I were her,  I’d want nothing more than to shove me into the sea.  He felt nothing but pity for the girl. She did not deserve the horror visited on her in Volantis, any  more than her brother had. The last time he had seen her, just before they left port, her eyes had been  raw from crying, two ghastly red holes in a wan, pale face. By the time they raised sail she had locked  herself in her cabin with her dog and her pig, but at night they could hear her weeping. Only yesterday  he had heard one of the mates say that they ought to throw her overboard before her tears could  swamp the ship. Tyrion was not entirely sure he had been japing.  When the evening prayers had ended and the ship’s crew had once again dispersed, some to  their watch and others to food and rum and hammocks, Moqorro remained beside his nightfire, as he   did every night. The red priest rested by day but kept vigil through the dark hours, to tend his sacred  flames so that the sun might return to them at dawn.  Tyrion squatted across from him and warmed his hands against the night’s chill. Moqorro took  no notice of him for several moments. He was staring into the flickering flames, lost in some vision. Does  he see days yet to come, as he claims? If so, that was a fearsome gift. After a time the priest raised his  eyes to meet the dwarf’s. “Hugor Hill,” he said, inclining his head in a solemn nod. “Have you come to  pray with me?”  “Someone told me that the night is dark and full of terrors. What do you see in those flames?”  “Dragons,” Moqorro said in the Common Tongue of Westeros. He spoke it very well, with hardly  a trace of accent. No doubt that was one reason the high priest Benerro had chosen him to bring the  faith of R’hllor to Daenerys Targaryen. “Dragons old and young, true and false, bright and dark. And you.  A small man with a big shadow, snarling in the midst of all.”  “Snarling? An amiable fellow like me?” Tyrion was almost flattered. And no doubt that is just  what he intends. Every fool loves to hear that he’s important. “Perhaps it was Penny you saw. We’re  almost of a size.”  “No, my friend.”  My friend? When did that happen, I wonder? “Did you see how long it will take us to reach  Meereen?”  “You are eager to behold the world’s deliverer?”  Yes and no. The world’s deliverer may snick off my head or give me to her dragons as a savory.  “Not me,” said Tyrion. “For me, it is all about the olives. Though I fear I may grow old and die before I  taste one. I could dog-paddle faster than we’re sailing. Tell me, was Selaesori Qhoran a tri-arch or a  turtle?”  The red priest chuckled. “Neither. Qhoran is … not a ruler, but one who serves and counsels  such, and helps conduct his business. You of Westeros might say steward or magister.”  King’s Hand? That amused him. “And selaesori?”  Moqorro touched his nose. “Imbued with a pleasant aroma. Fragrant, would you say? Flowery?”  “So Selaesori Qhoran means Stinky Steward, more or less?”  “Fragrant Steward, rather.”  Tyrion gave a crooked grin. “I believe I will stay with Stinky. But I do thank you for the lesson.”  “I am pleased to have enlightened you. Perhaps someday you will let me teach you the truth of  R’hllor as well.”   “Someday.” When I am a head on a spike.  The quarters he shared with Ser Jorah were a cabin only by courtesy; the dank, dark,  foul-smelling closet had barely enough space to hang a pair of sleeping hammocks, one above the other.  He found Mormont stretched out in the lower one, swaying slowly with the motion of the ship. “The girl  finally poked her nose abovedecks,” Tyrion told him. “One look at me and she scurried right back down  below.”  “You’re not a pretty sight.”  “Not all of us can be as comely as you. The girl is lost. It would not surprise me if the poor  creature wasn’t sneaking up to jump over the side and drown herself.”  “The poor creature’s name is Penny.”  “I know her name.” He hated her name. Her brother had gone by the name of Groat, though his  true name had been Oppo. Groat and Penny. The smallest coins, worth the least, and what’s worse, they  chose the names themselves. It left a bad taste in Tyrion’s mouth. “By any name, she needs a friend.”  Ser Jorah sat up in his hammock. “Befriend her, then. Marry her, for all I care.”  That left a bad taste in his mouth as well. “Like with like, is that your notion? Do you mean to  find a she-bear for yourself, ser?”  “You were the one who insisted that we bring her.”  “I said we could not abandon her in Volantis. That does not mean I want to fuck her. She wants  me dead, have you forgotten? I’m the last person she’s like to want as a friend.”  “You’re both dwarfs.”  “Yes, and so was her brother, who was killed because some drunken fools took him for me.”  “Feeling guilty, are you?”  “No.” Tyrion bristled. “I have sins enough to answer for; I’ll have no part of this one. I might  have nurtured some ill will toward her and her brother for the part they played the night of Joffrey’s  wedding, but I never wished them harm.”  “You are a harmless creature, to be sure. Innocent as a lamb.” Ser Jorah got to his feet. “The  dwarf girl is your burden. Kiss her, kill her, or avoid her, as you like. It’s naught to me.” He shouldered  past Tyrion and out of the cabin.  Twice exiled, and small wonder, Tyrion thought. I’d exile him too if I could. The man is cold,  brooding, sullen, deaf to humor. And those are his good points. Ser Jorah spent most of his waking hours  pacing the forecastle or leaning on the rail, gazing out to sea. Looking for his silver queen. Looking for  Daenerys, willing the ship to sail faster. Well, I might do the same if Tysha waited in Meereen.   Could Slaver’s Bay be where whores went? It seemed unlikely. From what he’d read, the slaver  cities were the place where whores were made. Mormont should have bought one for himself. A pretty  slave girl might have done wonders to improve his temper … particularly one with silvery hair, like the  whore who had been sitting on his cock back in Selhorys.  On the river Tyrion had to endure Griff, but there had at least been the mystery of the captain’s  true identity to divert him and the more congenial companionship of the rest of the poleboat’s little  company. On the cog, alas, everyone was just who they appeared to be, no one was particularly  congenial, and only the red priest was interesting. Him, and maybe Penny. But the girl hates me, and she  should.  Life aboard the Selaesori Qhoran was nothing if not tedious, Tyrion had found. The most exciting  part of his day was pricking his toes and fingers with a knife. On the river there had been wonders to  behold: giant turtles, ruined cities, stone men, naked septas. One never knew what might be lurking  around the next bend. The days and nights at sea were all the same. Leaving Volantis, the cog had sailed  within sight of land at first, so Tyrion could gaze at passing headlands, watch clouds of seabirds rise from  stony cliffs and crumbling watchtowers, count bare brown islands as they slipped past. He saw many  other ships as well: fishing boats, lumbering merchantmen, proud galleys with their oars lashing the  waves into white foam. But once they struck out into deeper waters, there was only sea and sky, air and  water. The water looked like water. The sky looked like sky. Sometimes there was a cloud. Too much  blue.  And the nights were worse. Tyrion slept badly at the best of times, and this was far from that.  Sleep meant dreams as like as not, and in his dreams the Sorrows waited, and a stony king with his  father’s face. That left him with the beggar’s choice of climbing up into his hammock and listening to  Jorah Mormont snore beneath him, or remaining abovedecks to contemplate the sea. On moonless  nights the water was as black as maester’s ink, from horizon to horizon. Dark and deep and forbidding,  beautiful in a chilly sort of way, but when he looked at it too long Tyrion found himself musing on how  easy it would be to slip over the gunwale and drop down into that darkness. One very small splash, and  the pathetic little tale that was his life would soon be done. But what if there is a hell and my father’s  waiting for me?  The best part of each evening was supper. The food was not especially good, but it was plentiful,  so that was where the dwarf went next. The galley where he took his meals was a cramped and  uncomfortable space, with a ceiling so low that the taller passengers were always in danger of cracking  their heads, a hazard the strapping slave soldiers of the Fiery Hand seemed particularly prone to. As  much as Tyrion enjoyed sniggering at that, he had come to prefer taking his meals alone. Sitting at a  crowded table with men who did not share a common language with you, listening to them talk and jape  whilst understanding none of it, had quickly grown wearisome. Particularly since he always found  himself wondering if the japes and laughter were directed at him.  The galley was also where the ship’s books were kept. Her captain being an especially bookish  man, she carried three—a collection of nautical poetry that went from bad to worse, a well-thumbed   tome about the erotic adventures of a young slave girl in a Lysene pillow house, and the fourth and final  volume of The Life of the Triarch Belicho, a famous Volantene patriot whose unbroken succession of  conquests and triumphs ended rather abruptly when he was eaten by giants. Tyrion had finished them  all by their third day at sea. Then, for lack of any other books, he started reading them again. The slave  girl’s story was the worst written but the most engrossing, and that was the one he took down this  evening to see him through a supper of buttered beets, cold fish stew, and biscuits that could have been  used to drive nails.  He was reading the girl’s account of the day she and her sister were taken by slavers when  Penny entered the galley. “Oh,” she said, “I thought … I did not mean to disturb m’lord, I …”  “You are not disturbing me. You’re not going to try to kill me again, I hope.”  “No.” She looked away, her face reddening. “In that case, I would welcome some company.  There’s little enough aboard this ship.” Tyrion closed the book. “Come. Sit. Eat.” The girl had left most of  her meals untouched outside her cabin door. By now she must be starving. “The stew is almost edible.  The fish is fresh, at least.”  “No, I … I choked on a fish bone once, I can’t eat fish.”  “Have some wine, then.” He filled a cup and slid it toward her. “Compliments of our captain.  Closer to piss than Arbor gold, if truth be told, but even piss tastes better than the black tar rum the  sailors drink. It might help you sleep.”  The girl made no move to touch the cup. “Thank you, m’lord, but no.” She backed away. “I  should not be bothering you.”  “Do you mean to spend your whole life running away?” Tyrion asked before she could slip back  out the door.  That stopped her. Her cheeks turned a bright pink, and he was afraid she was about to start  weeping again. Instead she thrust out her lip defiantly and said, “You’re running too.”  “I am,” he confessed, “but I am running to and you are running from, and there’s a world of  difference there.”  “We would never have had to run at all but for you.”  It took some courage to say that to my face. “Are you speaking of King’s Landing or Volantis?”  “Both.” Tears glistened in her eyes. “Everything. Why couldn’t you just come joust with us, the  way the king wanted? You wouldn’t have gotten hurt. What would that have cost m’lord, to climb up on  our dog and ride a tilt to please the boy? It was just a bit of fun. They would have laughed at you, that’s  all.”   “They would have laughed at me,” said Tyrion. I made them laugh at Joff instead. And wasn’t  that a clever ploy?  “My brother says that is a good thing, making people laugh. A noble thing, and honorable. My  brother says … he …” The tears fell then, rolling down her face.  “I am sorry about your brother.” Tyrion had said the same words to her before, back in Volantis,  but she was so far gone in grief back there that he doubted she had heard them.  She heard them now. “Sorry. You are sorry.” Her lip was trembling, her cheeks were wet, her  eyes were red-rimmed holes. “We left King’s Landing that very night. My brother said it was for the best,  before someone wondered if we’d had some part in the king’s death and decided to torture us to find  out. We went to Tyrosh first. My brother thought that would be far enough, but it wasn’t. We knew a  juggler there. For years and years he would juggle every day by the Fountain of the Drunken God. He  was old, so his hands were not as deft as they had been, and sometimes he would drop his balls and  chase them across the square, but the Tyroshi would laugh and throw him coins all the same. Then one  morning we heard that his body had been found at the Temple of Trios. Trios has three heads, and  there’s a big statue of him beside the temple doors. The old man had been cut into three parts and  pushed inside the threefold mouths of Trios. Only when the parts were sewn back together, his head  was gone.”  “A gift for my sweet sister. He was another dwarf.”  “A little man, aye. Like you, and Oppo. Groat. Are you sorry about the juggler too?”  “I never knew your juggler existed until this very moment … but yes, I am sorry he is dead.”  “He died for you. His blood is on your hands.”  The accusation stung, coming so hard on the heels of Jorah Mormont’s words. “His blood is on  my sister’s hands, and the hands of the brutes who killed him. My hands …” Tyrion turned them over,  inspected them, coiled them into fists. “… my hands are crusted with old blood, aye. Call me kinslayer,  and you won’t be wrong. Kingslayer, I’ll answer to that one as well. I have killed mothers, fathers,  nephews, lovers, men and women, kings and whores. A singer once annoyed me, so I had the bastard  stewed. But I have never killed a juggler, nor a dwarf, and I am not to blame for what happened to your  bloody brother.”  Penny picked the cup of wine he’d poured for her and threw it in his face. Just like my sweet  sister. He heard the galley door slam but never saw her leave. His eyes were stinging, and the world was  a blur. So much for befriending her.  Tyrion Lannister had scant experience with other dwarfs. His lord father had not welcomed any  reminders of his son’s deformities, and such mummers as featured little folk in their troupes soon  learned to stay away from Lannisport and Casterly Rock, at the risk of his displeasure. Growing up,  Tyrion heard reports of a dwarf jester at the seat of the Dornish Lord Fowler, a dwarf maester in service   on the Fingers, and a female dwarf amongst the silent sisters, but he never felt the least need to seek  them out. Less reliable tales also reached his ears, of a dwarf witch who haunted a hill in the riverlands,  and a dwarf whore in King’s Landing renowned for coupling with dogs. His own sweet sister had told him  of the last, even offering to find him a bitch in heat if he cared to try it out. When he asked politely if she  were referring to herself, Cersei had thrown a cup of wine in his face. That was red, as I recall, and this is  gold. Tyrion mopped at his face with a sleeve. His eyes still stung.  He did not see Penny again until the day of the storm.  The salt air lay still and heavy that morning, but the western sky was a fiery red, streaked with  lowering clouds that glowed as bright as Lannister crimson. Sailors were dashing about battening  hatches, running lines, clearing the decks, lashing down everything that was not already lashed down.  “Bad wind coming,” one warned him. “No-Nose should get below.”  Tyrion remembered the storm he’d suffered crossing the narrow sea, the way the deck had  jumped beneath his feet, the hideous creaking sounds the ship had made, the taste of wine and vomit.  “No-Nose will stay up here.” If the gods wanted him, he would sooner die by drowning than choking on  his own vomit. And overhead the cog’s canvas sail rippled slowly, like the fur of some great beast stirring  from a long sleep, then filled with a sudden crack that turned every head on the ship.  The winds drove the cog before them, far off her chosen course. Behind them black clouds piled  one atop another against a blood-red sky. By midmorning they could see lightning flickering to the west,  followed by the distant crash of thunder. The sea grew rougher, and dark waves rose up to smash  against the hull of the Stinky Steward. It was about then that the crew started hauling down the canvas.  Tyrion was underfoot amid-ships, so he climbed the forecastle and hunkered down, savoring the lash of  cold rain on his cheeks. The cog went up and down, bucking more wildly than any horse he’d ever  ridden, lifting with each wave before sliding down into the troughs between, jarring him to the bones.  Even so, it was better here where he could see than down below locked in some airless cabin.  By the time the storm broke, evening was upon them and Tyrion Lannister was soaked through  to the smallclothes, yet somehow he felt elated … and even more so later, when he found a drunken  Jorah Mor-mont in a pool of vomit in their cabin.  The dwarf lingered in the galley after supper, celebrating his survival by sharing a few tots of  black tar rum with the ship’s cook, a great greasy loutish Volantene who spoke only one word of the  Common Tongue (fuck), but played a ferocious game of cyvasse, particularly when drunk. They played  three games that night. Tyrion won the first, then lost the other two. After that he decided that he’d had  enough and stumbled back up on deck to clear his head of rum and elephants alike.  He found Penny on the forecastle, where he had so often found Ser Jorah, standing by the rail  beside the cog’s hideous half-rotted figurehead and gazing out across the inky sea. From behind, she  looked as small and vulnerable as a child.   Tyrion thought it best to leave her undisturbed, but it was too late. She had heard him. “Hugor  Hill.”  “If you like.” We both know better. “I am sorry to intrude on you. I will retire.”  “No.” Her face was pale and sad, but she did not look to have been crying. “I’m sorry too. About  the wine. It wasn’t you who killed my brother or that poor old man in Tyrosh.”  “I played a part, though not by choice.”  “I miss him so much. My brother. I …”  “I understand.” He found himself thinking of Jaime. Count yourself lucky. Your brother died  before he could betray you.  “I thought I wanted to die,” she said, “but today when the storm came and I thought the ship  would sink, I … I …”  “You realized that you wanted to live after all.” I have been there too. Something else we have in  common.  Her teeth were crooked, which made her shy with her smiles, but she smiled now. “Did you truly  cook a singer in a stew?”  “Who, me? No. I do not cook.”  When Penny giggled, she sounded like the sweet young girl she was … seventeen, eighteen, no  more than nineteen. “What did he do, this singer?”  “He wrote a song about me.” For she was his secret treasure, she was his shame and his bliss.  And a chain and a keep are nothing, compared to a woman’s kiss. It was queer how quick the words  came back to him. Perhaps they had never left him. Hands of gold are always cold, but a woman’s hands  are warm.  “It must have been a very bad song.”  “Not really. It was no ‘Rains of Castamere,’ mind you, but some parts were … well …”  “How did it go?”  He laughed. “No. You do not want to hear me sing.”  “My mother used to sing to us when we were children. My brother and me. She always sa id that  it didn’t matter what your voice was like so long as you loved the song.”  “Was she … ?”   “… a little person? No, but our father was. His own father sold him to a slaver when he was  three, but he grew up to be such a famous mummer that he bought his freedom. He traveled to all the  Free Cities, and Westeros as well. In Oldtown they used to call him Hop-Bean.”  Of course they did. Tyrion tried not to wince. “He’s dead now,” Penny went on. “My mother too.  Oppo … he was my last family, and now he’s gone too.” She turned her head away and gazed out across  the sea. “What will I do? Where will I go? I have no trade, just the jousting show, and that needs two.”  No, thought Tyrion. That is not a place you want to go, girl. Do not ask that of me. Do not even  think it. “Find yourself some likely orphan boy,” he suggested.  Penny did not seem to hear that. “It was Father’s idea to do the tilts. He even trained the first  pig, but by then he was too sick to ride her, so Oppo took his place. I always rode the dog. We  performed for the Sealord of Braavos once, and he laughed so hard that afterward he gave each of us a  … a grand gift.”  “Is that where my sister found you? In Braavos?”  “Your sister?” The girl looked lost. “Queen Cersei.”  Penny shook her head. “She never … it was a man who came to us, in Pentos. Osmund. No,  Oswald. Something like that. Oppo met with him, not me. Oppo made all of our arrangements. My  brother always knew what to do, where we should go next.”  “Meereen is where we’re going next.”  She gave him a puzzled look. “Qarth, you mean. We’re bound for Qarth, by way of New Ghis.”  “Meereen. You’ll ride your dog for the dragon queen and come away with your weight in gold.  Best start eating more, so you’ll be nice and plump when you joust before Her Grace.”  Penny did not return the smile. “By myself, all I can do is ride around in circles. And even if the  queen should laugh, where will I go afterward? We never stay in one place long. The first time they see  us they laugh and laugh, but by the fourth or fifth time, they know what we’re going to do before we do  it. Then they stop laughing, so we have to go somewhere new. We make the most coin in the big cities,  but I always liked the little towns the best. Places like that, the people have no silver, but they feed us at  their own tables, and the children follow us everywhere.”  That’s because they have never seen a dwarf before, in their wretched pisspot towns, Tyrion  thought. The bloody brats would follow around a two-headed goat if one turned up. Until they got bored  with its bleating and slaughtered it for supper. But he had no wish to make her weep again, so instead  he said, “Daenerys has a kind heart and a generous nature.” It was what she needed to hear. “She will  find a place for you at her court, I don’t doubt. A safe place, beyond my sister’s reach.”  Penny turned back to him. “And you will be there too.”   Unless Daenerys decides she needs some Lannister blood, to pay for the Targaryen blood my  brother shed. “I will.”  After that, the dwarf girl was seen more frequently above deck. The next day Tyrion  encountered her and her spotted sow amidships in midafternoon, when the air was warm and the sea  calm. “Her name is Pretty,” the girl told him, shyly.  Pretty the pig and Penny the girl, he thought. Someone has a deal to answer for. Penny gave  Tyrion some acorns, and he let Pretty eat them from his hand. Do not think I don’t see what you are  doing, girl, he thought, as the big sow snuffled and squealed.  Soon they began to take their meals together. Some nights it was just the two of them; at other  meals they crowded in with Moqorro’s guards. The fingers, Tyrion called them; they were men of the  Fiery Hand, after all, and there were five of them. Penny laughed at that, a sweet sound, though not one  that he heard often. Her wound was too fresh, her grief too deep.  He soon had her calling the ship the Stinky Steward, though she got somewhat wroth with him  whenever he called Pretty Bacon. To atone for that Tyrion made an attempt to teach her cyvasse,  though he soon realized that was a lost cause. “No,” he said, a dozen times, “the dragon flies, not the  elephants.”  That same night, she came right out and asked him if he would like to tilt with her. “No,” he  answered. Only later did it occur to him that perhaps tilt did not mean tilt. His answer would still have  been no, but he might not have been so brusque.  Back in the cabin he shared with Jorah Mormont, Tyrion twisted in his hammock for hours,  slipping in and out of sleep. His dreams were full of grey, stony hands reaching for him from out of the  fog, and a stair that led up to his father.  Finally he gave it up and made his way up top for a breath of night air. The Selaesori Qhoran had  furled her big striped sail for the night, and her decks were all but deserted. One of the mates was on  the sterncastle, and amidships Moqorro sat by his brazier, where a few small flames still danced  amongst the embers.  Only the brightest stars were visible, all to the west. A dull red glow lit the sky to the northeast,  the color of a blood bruise. Tyrion had never seen a bigger moon. Monstrous, swollen, it looked as if it  had swallowed the sun and woken with a fever. Its twin, floating on the sea beyond the ship, shimmered  red with every wave. “What hour is this?” he asked Moqorro. “That cannot be sunrise unless the east  has moved. Why is the sky red?”  “The sky is always red above Valyria, Hugor Hill.”  A cold chill went down his back. “Are we close?”   “Closer than the crew would like,” Moqorro said in his deep voice. “Do you know the stories, in  your Sunset Kingdoms?”  “I know some sailors say that any man who lays eyes upon that coast is doomed.” He did not  believe such tales himself, no more than his uncle had. Gerion Lannister had set sail for Valyria when  Tyrion was eighteen, intent on recovering the lost ancestral blade of House Lannister and any other  treasures that might have survived the Doom. Tyrion had wanted desperately to go with them, but his  lord father had dubbed the voyage a “fool’s quest,” and forbidden him to take part.  And perhaps he was not so wrong. Almost a decade had passed since the Laughing Lion headed  out from Lannisport, and Gerion had never returned. The men Lord Tywin sent to seek after him had  traced his course as far as Volantis, where half his crew had deserted him and he had bought slaves to  replace them. No free man would willingly sign aboard a ship whose captain spoke openly of his intent  to sail into the Smoking Sea. “So those are fires of the Fourteen Flames we’re seeing, reflected on the  clouds?”  “Fourteen or fourteen thousand. What man dares count them? It is not wise for mortals to look  too deeply at those fires, my friend. Those are the fires of god’s own wrath, and no human flame can  match them. We are small creatures, men.”  “Some smaller than others.” Valyria. It was written that on the day of Doom every hill for five  hundred miles had split asunder to fill the air with ash and smoke and fire, blazes so hot and hungry that  even the dragons in the sky were engulfed and consumed. Great rents had opened in the earth,  swallowing palaces, temples, entire towns. Lakes boiled or turned to acid, mountains burst, fiery  fountains spewed molten rock a thousand feet into the air, red clouds rained down dragonglass and the  black blood of demons, and to the north the ground splintered and collapsed and fell in on itself and an  angry sea came rushing in. The proudest city in all the world was gone in an instant, its fabled empire  vanished in a day, the Lands of the Long Summer scorched and drowned and blighted.  An empire built on blood and fire. The Valyrians reaped the seed they had sown. “Does our  captain mean to test the curse?”  “Our captain would prefer to be fifty leagues farther out to sea, well away from that accursed  shore, but I have commanded him to steer the shortest course. Others seek Daenerys too.”  Griff, with his young prince. Could all that talk of the Golden Company sailing west have been a  feint? Tyrion considered saying something, then thought better. It seemed to him that the prophecy  that drove the red priests had room for just one hero. A second Targaryen would only serve to confuse  them. “Have you seen these others in your fires?” he asked, warily.  “Only their shadows,” Moqorro said. “One most of all. A tall and twisted thing with one black  eye and ten long arms, sailing on a sea of blood.”   The sow had a sweeter temper than some horses he had ridden. Patient and sure-footed, she  accepted Tyrion with hardly a squeal when he clambered onto her back, and remained motionless as he  reached for shield and lance. Yet when he gathered up her reins and pressed his feet into her side, she  moved at once. Her name was Pretty, short for Pretty Pig, and she had been trained to saddle and bridle  since she was a piglet.  The painted wooden armor clattered as Pretty trotted across the deck. Tyrion’s armpits were  prickly with perspiration, and a bead of sweat was trickling down his scar beneath the oversized,  ill-fitting helm, yet for one absurd moment he felt almost like Jaime, riding out onto a tourney field with  lance in hand, his golden armor flashing in the sun.   When the laughter began, the dream dissolved. He was no champion, just a dwarf on a pig  clutching a stick, capering for the amusement of some restless rum-soaked sailors in hopes of  sweetening their mood. Somewhere down in hell his father was seething and Joffrey was chuckling.  Tyrion could feel their cold dead eyes watching this mummer’s face, as avid as the crew of the Selaesori  Qhoran.  And now here came his foe. Penny rode her big grey dog, her striped lance waving drunkenly as  the beast bounded across the deck. Her shield and armor had been painted red, though the paint was  chipped and fading; his own armor was blue. Not mine. Groat’s. Never mine, I pray.  Tyrion kicked at Pretty’s haunches to speed her to a charge as the sailors urged him on with  hoots and shouts. Whether they were shouting encouragement or mocking him he could not have said  for certain, though he had a fair notion. Why did I ever allow myself to be talked into this farce?  He knew the answer, though. For twelve days now the ship had floated becalmed in the Gulf of  Grief. The mood of the crew was ugly, and like to turn uglier when their daily rum ration went dry. There  were only so many hours a man could devote to mending sails, caulking leaks, and fishing. Jorah  Mormont had heard the muttering about how dwarf luck had failed them. Whilst the ship’s cook still  gave Tyrion’s head a rub from time to time, in hopes that it might stir a wind, the rest had taken to  giving him venomous looks whenever he crossed their paths. Penny’s lot was even worse, since the cook  had put about the notion that squeezing a dwarf girl’s breast might be just the thing to win their luck  back. He had also started referring to Pretty Pig as Bacon, a jape that had seemed much funnier when  Tyrion had made it.  “We have to make them laugh,” Penny had said, pleading. “We have to make them like us. If we  give them a show, it will help them forget. Please, m’lord.” And somehow, somewise, someway he had  consented. It must have been the rum. The captain’s wine had been the first thing to run out. You could  get drunk much quicker on rum than on wine, Tyrion Lannister had discovered.  So he found himself clad in Groat’s painted wooden armor, astride Groat’s sow, whilst Groat’s  sister instructed him in the finer points of the mummer’s joust that had been their bread and salt. It had  a certain delicious irony to it, considering that Tyrion had almost lost his head once by refusing to mount  the dog for his nephew’s twisted amusement. Yet somehow he found it difficult to appreciate the  humor of it all from sowback.  Penny’s lance descended just in time for its blunted point to brush his shoulder; his own lance  wobbled as he brought it down and banged it noisily off a corner of her shield. She kept her seat. He lost  his. But then, he was supposed to.  Easy as falling off a pig … though falling off this particular pig was harder than it looked. Tyrion  curled into a ball as he dropped, remembering his lesson, but even so, he hit the deck with a solid thump  and bit his tongue so hard he tasted blood. He felt as if he were twelve again, cartwheeling across the  supper table in Casterly Rock’s great hall. Back then his uncle Gerion had been on hand to praise his  efforts, in place of surly sailors. Their laughter seemed sparse and strained compared to the great gales   that had greeted Groat’s and Penny’s antics at Joffrey’s wedding feast, and some hissed at him in anger.  “ No-Nose, you ride same way you look, ugly,” one man shouted from the sterncastle. “Must have no  balls, let girl beat you.” He wagered coin on me, Tyrion decided. He let the insult wash right over him. He  had heard worse in his time.  The wooden armor made rising awkward. He found himself flailing like a turtle on its back. That,  at least, set a few of the sailors to laughing. A shame I did not break my leg, that would have left them  howling. And if they had been in that privy when I shot my father through the bowels, they might have  laughed hard enough to shit their breeches right along with him. But anything to keep the bloody  bastards sweet.  Jorah Mormont finally took pity on Tyrion’s struggles and pulled him to his feet. “You looked a  fool.”  That was the intent. “It is hard to look a hero when mounted on a pig.”  “That must be why I stay off pigs.”  Tyrion unbuckled his helm, twisted it off, and spat a gobbet of bloody pink phlegm over the side.  “It feels as though I bit through half my tongue.”  “Next time bite harder.” Ser Jorah shrugged. “Truth be told, I’ve seen worse jousters.”  Was that praise? “I fell off the bloody pig and bit my tongue. What could possibly be worse than  that?”  “Getting a splinter through your eye and dying.”  Penny had vaulted off her dog, a big grey brute called Crunch. “The thing is not to joust well,  Hugor.” She was always careful to call him Hugor where anyone might hear. “The thing is to make them  laugh and throw coins.”  Poor payment for the blood and bruises, Tyrion thought, but he kept that to himself as well. “We  failed at that as well. No one threw coins.” Not a penny, not a groat.  “They will when we get better.” Penny pulled off her helm. Mouse-brown hair spilled down to  her ears. Her eyes were brown too, beneath a heavy shelf of brow, her cheeks smooth and flushed. She  pulled some acorns from a leather bag for Pretty Pig. The sow ate them from her hand, squealing  happily. “When we perform for Queen Daenerys the silver will rain down, you’ll see.”  Some of the sailors were shouting at them and slamming their heels against the deck,  demanding another tilt. The ship’s cook was the loudest, as always. Tyrion had learned to despise that  man, even if he was the only half-decent cyvasse player on the cog. “You see, they liked us,” Penny said,  with a hopeful little smile. “Shall we go again, Hugor?”   He was on the point of refusing when a shout from one of the mates spared him the necessity. It  was midmorning, and the captain wanted the boats out again. The cog’s huge striped sail hung limply  from her mast, as it had for days, but he was hopeful that they could find a wind somewhere to the  north. That meant rowing. The boats were small, however, and the cog was large; towing it was hot,  sweaty, exhausting work that left the hands blistered and the back aching, and accomplished nothing.  The crew hated it. Tyrion could not blame them. “The widow should have put us on a galley,” he  muttered sourly. “If someone could help me out of these bloody planks, I would be grateful. I think I  may have a splinter through my crotch.”  Mormont did the duty, albeit with poor grace. Penny collected her dog and pig and led them  both below. “You might want to tell your lady to keep her door closed and barred when she’s inside,”  Ser Jorah said as he was undoing the buckles on the straps that joined the wooden breastplate to the  backplate. “I’m hearing too much talk about ribs and hams and bacon.”  “That pig is half her livelihood.”  “A Ghiscari crew would eat the dog as well.” Mormont pulled the breastplate and backplate  apart. “Just tell her.”  “As you wish.” His tunic was soaked with sweat and clinging to his chest. Tyrion plucked at it,  wishing for a bit of breeze. The wooden armor was as hot and heavy as it was uncomfortable. Half of it  looked to be old paint, layer on layer on layer of it, from a hundred past repaintings. At Joffrey’s  wedding feast, he recalled, one rider had displayed the direwolf of Robb Stark, the other the arms and  colors of Stannis Baratheon. “We will need both animals if we’re to tilt for Queen Daenerys,” he said. If  the sailors took it in their heads to butcher Pretty Pig, neither he nor Penny could hope to stop them …  but Ser Jorah’s longsword might give them pause, at least.  “Is that how you hope to keep your head, Imp?”  “Ser Imp, if you please. And yes. Once Her Grace knows my true worth, she’ll cherish me. I am a  lovable little fellow, after all, and I know many useful things about my kin. But until such time I had best  keep her amused.”  “Caper as you like, it won’t wash out your crimes. Daenerys Targaryen is no silly child to be  diverted by japes and tumbles. She will deal with you justly.”  Oh, I hope not. Tyrion studied Mormont with his mismatched eyes. “And how will she welcome  you, this just queen? A warm embrace, a girlish titter, a headsman’s axe?” He grinned at the knight’s  obvious discomfit. “Did you truly expect me to believe you were about the queen’s business in that  whorehouse? Defending her from half a world away? Or could it be that you were running, that your  dragon queen sent you from her side? But why would she … oh, wait, you were spying on her.” Tyrion  made a clucking sound. “You hope to buy your way back into her favor by presenting her with me. An  ill-considered scheme, I’d say. One might even say an act of drunken desperation. Perhaps if I were  Jaime … but Jaime killed her father, I only killed my own. You think Daenerys will execute me and pardon   you, but the reverse is just as likely. Maybe you should hop up on that pig, Ser Jorah. Put on a suit of iron  motley, like Florian the—”  The blow the big knight gave him cracked his head around and knocked him sideways, so hard  that his head bounced off the deck. Blood filled his mouth as he staggered back onto one knee. He spat  out a broken tooth. Growing prettier every day, but I do believe I poked a wound. “Did the dwarf say  something to offend you, ser?” Tyrion asked innocently, wiping bubbles of blood off his broken lip with  the back of his hand.  “I am sick of your mouth, dwarf,” said Mormont. “You still have a few teeth left. If you want to  keep them, stay away from me for the rest of this voyage.”  “That could be difficult. We share a cabin.”  “You can find somewhere else to sleep. Down in the hold, up on deck, it makes no matter. Just  keep out of my sight.”  Tyrion pulled himself back to his feet. “As you wish,” he answered, through a mouthful of blood,  but the big knight was already gone, his boots pounding on the deckboards.  Below, in the galley, Tyrion was rinsing out his mouth with rum and water and wincing at the  sting when Penny found him. “I heard what happened. Oh, are you hurt?”  He shrugged. “A bit of blood and a broken tooth.” But I believe I hurt him more. “And him a  knight. Sad to say, I would not count on Ser Jorah should we need protection.”  “What did you do? Oh, your lip is bleeding.” She slipped a square from her sleeve and dabbed at  it. “What did you say?”  “A few truths Ser Bezoar did not care to hear.”  “You mustn’t mock him. Don’t you know anything? You can’t talk that way to a big person. They  can hurt you. Ser Jorah could have tossed you in the sea. The sailors would have laughed to see you  drown. You have to be careful around big people. Be jolly and playful with them, keep them smiling,  make them laugh, that’s what my father always said. Didn’t your father ever tell you how to act with big  people?”  “My father called them smallfolk,” said Tyrion, “and he was not what you’d call a jolly man.” He  took another sip of watered rum, sloshed it around his mouth, spat it out. “Still, I take your point. I have  a deal to learn about being a dwarf. Perhaps you will be good enough to teach me, in between the  jousting and the pig-riding.”  “I will, m’lord. Gladly. But … what were these truths? Why did Ser Jorah hit you so hard?”   “Why, for love. The same reason that I stewed that singer.” He thought of Shae and the look in  her eyes as he tightened the chain about her throat, twisting it in his fist. A chain of golden hands. For  hands of gold are always gold, but a woman’s hands are warm. “Are you a maid, Penny?”  She blushed. “Yes. Of course. Who would have—”  “Stay that way. Love is madness, and lust is poison. Keep your maiden-head. You’ll be happier  for it, and you’re less like to find yourself in some dingy brothel on the Rhoyne with a whore who looks a  bit like your lost love.” Or chasing across half the world, hoping to find wherever whores go. “Ser Jorah  dreams of rescuing his dragon queen and basking in her gratitude, but I know a thing or two about the  gratitude of kings, and I’d sooner have a palace in Valyria.” He broke off suddenly. “Did you feel that?  The ship moved.”  “It did.” Penny’s face lit up with joy. “We’re moving again. The wind …” She rushed to the door.  “I want to see. Come, I’ll race you up.” Off she went.  She is young, Tyrion had to remind himself, as Penny scrambled from the galley and up the steep  wooden steps as fast as her short legs would allow. Almost a child. Still, it tickled him to see her  excitement. He followed her topside.  The sail had come to life again, billowing, emptying, then billowing again, the red stripes on the  canvas wriggling like snakes. Sailors dashed across the decks and hauled on lines as the mates bellowed  orders in the tongue of Old Volantis. The rowers in the ship’s boats had loosed their tow ropes and  turned back toward the cog, stroking hard. The wind was blowing from the west, swirling and gusting,  clutching at ropes and cloaks like a mischievous child. The Selaesori Qhoran was under way.  Might be we’ll make Meereen after all, Tyrion thought.  But when he clambered up the ladder to the sterncastle and looked off from the stern, his smile  faltered. Blue sky and blue sea here, but off west … I have never seen a sky that color. A thick band of  clouds ran along the horizon. “A bar sinister,” he said to Penny, pointing.  “What does that mean?” she asked. “It means some big bastard is creeping up behind us.”  He was surprised to find that Moqorro and two of his fiery fingers had joined them on the  sterncastle. It was only midday, and the red priest and his men did not normally emerge till dusk. The  priest gave him a solemn nod. “There you see it, Hugor Hill. God’s wroth. The Lord of Light will not be  mocked.”  Tyrion had a bad feeling about this. “The widow said this ship would never reach her  destination. I took that to mean that once we were out to sea beyond the reach of triarchs, the captain  would change course for Meereen. Or perhaps that you would seize the ship with your Fiery Hand and  take us to Daenerys. But that isn’t what your high priest saw at all, is it?”   “No.” Moqorro’s deep voice tolled as solemnly as a funeral bell. “This is what he saw.” The red  priest lifted his staff, and inclined its head toward the west.  Penny was lost. “I don’t understand. What does it mean?”  “It means we had best get below. Ser Jorah has exiled me from our cabin. Might I hide in yours  when the time comes?”  “Yes,” she said. “You would be … oh …”  For the better part of three hours they ran before the wind, as the storm grew closer. The  western sky went green, then grey, then black. A wall of dark clouds loomed up behind them, churning  like a kettle of milk left on the fire too long. Tyrion and Penny watched from the forecastle, huddled by  the figurehead and holding hands, careful to stay out of the way of captain and crew.  The last storm had been thrilling, intoxicating, a sudden squall that had left him feeling cleansed  and refreshed. This one felt different right from the first. The captain sensed it too. He changed their  course to north by northeast to try and get out of the storm’s path.  It was a futile effort. This storm was too big. The seas around them grew rougher. The wind  began to howl. The Stinky Steward rose and fell as waves smashed against her hull. Behind them  lightning stabbed down from the sky, blinding purple bolts that danced across the sea in webs of light.  Thunder followed. “The time has come to hide.” Tyrion took Penny by the arm and led her belowdecks.  Pretty and Crunch were were both half-mad with fear. The dog was barking, barking, barking. He  knocked Tyrion right off his feet as they entered. The sow had been shitting everywhere. Tyrion cleaned  that up as best he could whilst Penny tried to calm the animals. Then they tied down or put away  anything that was still loose. “I’m frightened,” Penny confessed. The cabin had begun to tilt and jump,  going this way and that as the waves hammered at the hull of the ship.  There are worse ways to die than drowning. Your brother learned that, and so did my lord father.  And Shae, that lying cunt. Hands of gold are always cold, but a woman’s hands are warm. “We should  play a game,” Tyrion suggested. “That might help take our thoughts off the storm.”  “Not cyvasse,” she said at once. “Not cyvasse,” Tyrion agreed, as the deck rose under him. That  would only lead to pieces flying violently across the cabin and raining down on sow and dog. “When you  were a little girl, did you ever play come-into-my-castle?”  “No. Can you teach me?”  Could he? Tyrion hesitated. Fool of a dwarf. Of course she’s never played come-into-my-castle.  She never had a castle. Come-into-my-castle was a game for highborn children, one meant to teach  them courtesy, heraldry, and a thing or two about their lord father’s friends and foes. “That won’t …” he  started. The deck gave another violent heave, slamming the two of them together. Penny gave a squeak  of fright. “That game won’t do,” Tyrion told her, gritting his teeth. “Sorry. I don’t know what game—”   “I do.” Penny kissed him.  It was an awkward kiss, rushed, clumsy. But it took him utterly by surprise. His hands jerked up  and grabbed hold of her shoulders to shove her away. Instead he hesitated, then pulled her closer, gave  her a squeeze. Her lips were dry, hard, closed up tighter than a miser’s purse. A small mercy, thought  Tyrion. This was nothing he had wanted. He liked Penny, he pitied Penny, he even admired Penny in a  way, but he did not desire her. He had no wish to hurt her, though; the gods and his sweet sister had  given her enough pain. So he let the kiss go on, holding her gently by the shoulders. His own lips stayed  firmly shut. The Selaesori Qhoran rolled and shuddered around them.  Finally she pulled back an inch or two. Tyrion could see his own reflection shining in her eyes.  Pretty eyes, he thought, but he saw other things as well. A lot of fear, a little hope … but not a bit of lust.  She does not want me, no more than I want her.  When she lowered her head, he took her under the chin and raised it up again. “We cannot play  that game, my lady.” Above the thunder boomed, close at hand now.  “I never meant … I never kissed a boy before, but … I only thought, what if we drown, and I …  I …”  “It was sweet,” lied Tyrion, “but I am married. She was with me at the feast, you may remember  her. Lady Sansa.”  “Was she your wife? She … she was very beautiful …”  And false. Sansa, Shae, all my women … Tysha was the only one who ever loved me. Where do  whores go? “A lovely girl,” said Tyrion, “and we were joined beneath the eyes of gods and men. It may  be that she is lost to me, but until I know that for a certainty I must be true to her.”  “I understand.” Penny turned her face away from his.  My perfect woman, Tyrion thought bitterly. One still young enough to believe such blatant lies.  The hull was creaking, the deck moving, and Pretty was squealing in distress. Penny crawled  across the cabin floor on her hands and knees, wrapped her arms around the sow’s head, and  murmured reassurance to her. Looking at the two of them, it was hard to know who was comforting  whom. The sight was so grotesque it should have been hilarious, but Tyrion could not even find a smile.  The girl deserves better than a pig, he thought. An honest kiss, a little kindness, everyone deserves that  much, however big or small. He looked about for his wine cup, but when he found it all the rum had  spilled. Drowning is bad enough, he reflected sourly, but drowning sad and sober, that’s too cruel.  In the end, they did not drown … though there were times when the prospect of a nice, peaceful  drowning had a certain appeal. The storm raged for the rest of that day and well into the night. Wet  winds howled around them and waves rose like the fists of drowned giants to smash down on their  decks. Above, they learned later, a mate and two sailors were swept overboard, the ship’s cook was   blinded when a kettle of hot grease flew up into his face, and the captain was thrown from the  stern-castle to the main deck so violently he broke both legs. Below, Crunch howled and barked and  snapped at Penny, and Pretty Pig began to shit again, turning the cramped, damp cabin into a sty. Tyrion  managed to avoid retching his way through all of this, chiefly thanks to the lack of wine. Penny was not  so fortunate, but he held her anyway as the ship’s hull creaked and groaned alarmingly around them,  like a cask about to burst.  Nearby midnight the winds finally died away, and the sea grew calm enough for Tyrion to make  his way back up onto deck. What he saw there did not reassure him. The cog was drifting on a sea of  dragonglass beneath a bowl of stars, but all around the storm raged on. East, west, north, south,  everywhere he looked, the clouds rose up like black mountains, their tumbled slopes and collossal cliffs  alive with blue and purple lightning. No rain was falling, but the decks were slick and wet underfoot.  Tyrion could hear someone screaming from below, a thin, high voice hysterical with fear. He  could hear Moqorro too. The red priest stood on the forecastle facing the storm, his staff raised above  his head as he boomed a prayer. Amidships, a dozen sailors and two of the fiery fingers were struggling  with tangled lines and sodden canvas, but whether they were trying to raise the sail again or pull it down  he never knew. Whatever they were doing, it seemed to him a very bad idea. And so it was.  The wind returned as a whispered threat, cold and damp, brushing over his cheek, flapping the  wet sail, swirling and tugging at Moqorro’s scarlet robes. Some instinct made Tyrion grab hold of the  nearest rail, just in time. In the space of three heartbeats the little breeze became a howling gale.  Moqorro shouted something, and green flames leapt from the dragon’s maw atop his staff to vanish in  the night. Then the rains came, black and blinding, and forecastle and sterncastle both vanished behind  a wall of water. Something huge flapped overhead, and Tyrion glanced up in time to see the sail taking  wing, with two men still dangling from the lines. Then he heard a crack. Oh, bloody hell, he had time to  think, that had to be the mast.  He found a line and pulled on it, fighting toward the hatch to get himself below out of the storm,  but a gust of wind knocked his feet from under him and a second slammed him into the rail and there he  clung. Rain lashed at his face, blinding him. His mouth was full of blood again. The ship groaned and  growled beneath him like a constipated fat man straining to shit.  Then the mast burst.  Tyrion never saw it, but he heard it. That cracking sound again and then a scream of tortured  wood, and suddenly the air was full of shards and splinters. One missed his eye by half an inch, a second  found his neck, a third went through his calf, boots and breeches and all. He screamed. But he held on  to the line, held on with a desperate strength he did not know he had. The widow said this ship would  never reach her destination, he remembered. Then he laughed and laughed, wild and hysterical, as  thunder boomed and timbers moaned and waves crashed all around him.  By the time the storm abated and the surviving passengers and crew came crawling back on  deck, like pale pink worms wriggling to the surface after a rain, the Selaesori Qhoran was a broken thing,   floating low in the water and listing ten degrees to port, her hull sprung in half a hundred places, her  hold awash in seawater, her mast a splintered ruin no taller than a dwarf. Even her figurehead had not  escaped; one of his arms had broken off, the one with all his scrolls. Nine men had been lost, including a  mate, two of the fiery fingers, and Moqorro himself.  Did Benerro see this in his fires? Tyrion wondered, when he realized the huge red priest was  gone. Did Moqorro?  “Prophecy is like a half-trained mule,” he complained to Jorah Mormont. “It looks as though it  might be useful, but the moment you trust in it, it kicks you in the head. That bloody widow knew the  ship would never reach her destination, she warned us of that, said Benerro saw it in his fires, only I took  that to mean … well, what does it matter?” His mouth twisted. “What it really meant was that some  bloody big storm would turn our mast to kindling so we could drift aimlessly across the Gulf of Grief until  our food ran out and we started eating one another. Who do you suppose they’ll carve up first … the  pig, the dog, or me?”  “The noisiest, I’d say.”  The captain died the following day, the ship’s cook three nights later. It was all that the  remaining crew could do to keep the wreck afloat. The mate who had assumed command reckoned that  they were somewhere off the southern end of the Isle of Cedars. When he lowered the ship’s boats to  tow them toward the nearest land, one sank and the men in the other cut the line and rowed off north,  abandoning the cog and all their shipmates.  “Slaves,” said Jorah Mormont, contemptuous.  The big knight had slept through the storm, to hear him tell it. Tyrion had his doubts, but he kept  them to himself. One day he might want to bite someone in the leg, and for that you needed teeth.  Mormont seemed content to ignore their disagreement, so Tyrion decided to pretend it had not  happened.  For nineteen days they drifted, as food and water dwindled. The sun beat down on them,  relentless. Penny huddled in her cabin with her dog and her pig, and Tyrion brought her food, limping on  his bandaged calf and sniffing at the wound by night. When he had nothing else to do, he pricked his  toes and fingers too. Ser Jorah made a point of sharpening his sword each day, honing the point until it  gleamed. The three remaining fiery fingers lit the nightfire as the sun went down, but they wore their  ornate armor as they led the crew in prayer, and their spears were close at hand. And not a single sailor  tried to rub the head of either dwarf.  “Should we joust for them again?” Penny asked one night. “Best not,” said Tyrion. “That would  only serve to remind them we have a nice plump pig.” Though Pretty was growing less plump with every  passing day, and Crunch was fur and bones.   That night he dreamed that he was back in King’s Landing again, a crossbow in his hand.  “Wherever whores go,” Lord Tywin said, but when Tyrion’s finger clenched and the bowstring  thrummed, it was Penny with the quarrel buried in her belly.  He woke to the sound of shouting.  The deck was moving under him, and for half a heartbeat he was so confused he thought he was  back on the Shy Maid. A whiff of pigshit brought him to his senses. The Sorrows were behind him, half a  world away, and the joys of that time as well. He remembered how sweet Le-more had looked after her  morning swims, with beads of water glistening on her naked skin, but the only maiden here was his poor  Penny, the stunted little dwarf girl.  Something was afoot, though. Tyrion slipped from the hammock, yawning, and looked about for  his boots. And mad though it was, he looked for the crossbow as well, but of course there was none  such to be found. A pity, he mused, it might have been some use when the big folk come to eat me. He  pulled his boots on and climbed on deck to see what the shouting was about. Penny was there before  him, her eyes wide with wonder. “A sail,” she shouted, “there, there, do you see? A sail, and they’ve  seen us, they have. A sail.”  This time he kissed her … once on each cheek, once on the brow, and one last one on the  mouth. She was flushed and laughing by the last kiss, suddenly shy again, but it made no matter. The  other ship was closing. A big galley, he saw. Her oars left a long white wake behind her. “What ship is  that?” he asked Ser Jorah Mormont. “Can you read her name?”  “I don’t need to read her name. We’re downwind. I can smell her.” Mormont drew his sword.  “That’s a slaver.”  Lot ninety-seven.” The auctioneer snapped his whip. “A pair of dwarfs, well trained for your  amusement.”  The auction block had been thrown up where the broad brown Skahazadhan flowed into  Slaver’s Bay. Tyrion Lannister could smell the salt in the air, mingled with the stink from the latrine  ditches behind the slave pens. He did not mind the heat so much as he did the damp. The very air  seemed to weigh him down, like a warm wet blanket across his head and shoulders.  “Dog and pig included in lot,” the auctioneer announced. “The dwarfs ride them. Delight the  guests at your next feast or use them for a folly.”  The bidders sat on wooden benches sipping fruit drinks. A few were being fanned by slaves.  Many wore tokars, that peculiar garment beloved by the old blood of Slaver’s Bay, as elegant as it was  impractical. Others dressed more plainly—men in tunics and hooded cloaks, women in colored silks.  Whores or priestesses, most like; this far east it was hard to tell the two apart.  Back behind the benches, trading japes and making mock of the proceedings, stood a clot of  westerners. Sellswords, Tyrion knew. He spied longswords, dirks and daggers, a brace of throwing axes,  mail beneath their cloaks. Their hair and beards and faces marked most for men of the Free Cities, but  here and there were a few who might have been Westerosi. Are they buying? Or did they just turn up for  the show?  “Who will open for this pair?”  “Three hundred,” bid a matron on an antique palanquin. “Four,” called a monstrously fat  Yunkishman from the litter where he sprawled like a leviathan. Covered all in yellow silk fringed with  gold, he looked as large as four Illyrios. Tyrion pitied the slaves who had to carry him. At least we will be  spared that duty. What joy to be a dwarf.  “And one,” said a crone in a violet tokar. The auctioneer gave her a sour look but did not  disallow the bid.  The slave sailors off the Selaesori Qhoran, sold singly, had gone for prices ranging from five  hundred to nine hundred pieces of silver. Seasoned seamen were a valuable commodity. None had put  up any sort of fight when the slav ers boarded their crippled cog. For them this was just a change of  owner. The ship’s mates had been free men, but the widow of the waterfront had written them a  binder, promising to stand their ransom in such a case as this. The three surviving fiery fingers had not  been sold yet, but they were chattels of the Lord of Light and could count on being bought back by some  red temple. The flames tattooed upon their faces were their binders.  Tyrion and Penny had no such reassurance. “Four-fifty,” came the bid. “Four-eighty.”   “Five hundred.”  Some bids were called out in High Valyrian, some in the mongrel tongue of Ghis. A few buyers  signaled with a finger, the twist of a wrist, or the wave of a painted fan.  “I’m glad they are keeping us together,” Penny whispered.  The slave trader shot them a look. “No talk.”  Tyrion gave Penny’s shoulder a squeeze. Strands of hair, pale blond and black, clung to his brow,  the rags of his tunic to his back. Some of that was sweat, some dried blood. He had not been so foolish  as to fight the slavers, as Jorah Mormont had, but that did not mean he had escaped punishment. In his  case it was his mouth that earned him lashes.  “Eight hundred.”  “And fifty.”  “And one.”  We’re worth as much as a sailor, Tyrion mused. Though perhaps it was Pretty Pig the buyers  wanted. A well-trained pig is hard to find. They certainly were not bidding by the pound.  At nine hundred pieces of silver, the bidding began to slow. At nine hundred fifty-one (from the  crone), it stopped. The auctioneer had the scent, though, and nothing would do but that the dwarfs give  the crowd a taste of their show. Crunch and Pretty Pig were led up onto the platform. Without saddles  or bridles, mounting them proved tricky. The moment the sow began to move Tyrion slid off her rump  and landed on his own, provoking gales of laughter from the bidders.  “One thousand,” bid the grotesque fat man.  “And one.” The crone again.  Penny’s mouth was frozen in a rictus of a smile. Well trained for your amusement. Her father  had a deal to answer for, in whatever small hell was reserved for dwarfs.  “Twelve hundred.” The leviathan in yellow. A slave beside him handed him a drink. Lemon, no  doubt. The way those yellow eyes were fixed upon the block made Tyrion uncomfortable.  “Thirteen hundred.”  “And one.” The crone.  My father always said a Lannister was worth ten times as much as any common man.  At sixteen hundred the pace began to flag again, so the slave trader invited some of the buyers  to come up for a closer look at the dwarfs. “The female’s young,” he promised. “You could breed the  two of them, get good coin for the whelps.”   “Half his nose is gone,” complained the crone once she’d had a good close look. Her wrinkled  face puckered with displeasure. Her flesh was maggot white; wrapped in the violet tokar, she looked like  a prune gone to mold. “His eyes don’t match neither. An ill-favored thing.”  “My lady hasn’t seen my best part yet.” Tyrion grabbed his crotch, in case she missed his  meaning.  The hag hissed in outrage, and Tyrion got a lick of the whip across his back, a stinging cut that  drove him to his knees. The taste of blood filled his mouth. He grinned and spat.  “Two thousand,” called a new voice, back of the benches.  And what would a sellsword want with a dwarf? Tyrion pushed himself back to his feet to get a  better look. The new bidder was an older man, white-haired yet tall and fit, with leathery brown skin  and a close-cropped salt-and-pepper beard. Half-hidden under a faded purple cloak were a longsword  and a brace of daggers.  “Twenty-five hundred.” A female voice this time; a girl, short, with a thick waist and heavy  bosom, clad in ornate armor. Her sculpted black steel breastplate was inlaid in gold and showed a harpy  rising with chains dangling from her claws. A pair of slave soldiers lifted her to shoulder height on a  shield.  “Three thousand.” The brown-skinned man pushed through the crowd, his fellow sellswords  shoving buyers aside to clear a path. Yes. Come closer. Tyrion knew how to deal with sellswords. He did  not think for a moment that this man wanted him to frolic at feasts. He knows me. He means to take me  back to Westeros and sell me to my sister. The dwarf rubbed his mouth to hide his smile. Cersei and the  Seven Kingdoms were half a world away. Much and more could happen before he got there. I turned  Bronn. Give me half a chance, might be I could turn this one too.  The crone and the girl on the shield gave up the chase at three thousand, but not the fat man in  yellow. He weighed the sellswords with his yellow eyes, flicked his tongue across his yellow teeth, and  said, “Five thousand silvers for the lot.”  The sellsword frowned, shrugged, turned away.  Seven hells. Tyrion was quite certain that he did not want to become the property of the  immense Lord Yellowbelly. Just the sight of him sagging across his litter, a mountain of sallow flesh with  piggy yellow eyes and breasts big as Pretty Pig pushing at the silk of his tokar was enough to make the  dwarf’s skin crawl. And the smell wafting off him was palpable even on the block.  “If there are no further bids—”  “Seven thousand,” shouted Tyrion.  Laughter rippled across the benches. “The dwarf wants to buy himself,” the girl on the shield  observed.   Tyrion gave her a lascivious grin. “A clever slave deserves a clever master, and you lot all look  like fools.”  That provoked more laughter from the bidders, and a scowl from the auctioneer, who was  fingering his whip indecisively as he tried to puzzle out whether this would work to his benefit.  “Five thousand is an insult!” Tyrion called out. “I joust, I sing, I say amusing things. I’ll fuck your  wife and make her scream. Or your enemy’s wife if you prefer, what better way to shame him? I’m  murder with a cross-bow, and men three times my size quail and tremble when we meet across a  cyvasse table. I have even been known to cook from time to time. I bid ten thousand silvers for myself!  I’m good for it, I am, I am. My father told me I must always pay my debts.”  The sellsword in the purple cloak turned back. His eyes met Tyrion’s across the rows of other  bidders, and he smiled. A warm smile, that, the dwarf reflected. Friendly. But my, those eyes are cold.  Might be I don’t want him to buy us after all.  The yellow enormity was squirming in his litter, a look of annoyance on his huge pie face. He  muttered something sour in Ghiscari that Tyrion did not understand, but the tone of it was plain  enough. “Was that another bid?” The dwarf cocked his head. “I offer all the gold of Casterly Rock.”  He heard the whip before he felt it, a whistle in the air, thin and sharp. Tyrion grunted under the  blow, but this time he managed to stay on his feet. His thoughts flashed back to the beginnings of his  journey, when his most pressing problem had been deciding which wine to drink with his midmorning  snails. See what comes of chasing dragons. A laugh burst from his lips, spattering the first row of buyers  with blood and spit.  “You are sold,” the auctioneer announced. Then he hit him again, just because he could. This  time Tyrion went down.  One of the guards yanked him back to his feet. Another prodded Penny down off the platform  with the butt of his spear. The next piece of chattel was already being led up to take their place. A girl,  fifteen or sixteen, not off the Selaesori Qhoran this time. Tyrion did not know her. The same age as  Daenerys Targaryen, or near enough. The slaver soon had her naked. At least we were spared that  humiliation.  Tyrion gazed across the Yunkish camp to the walls of Meereen. Those gates looked so close …  and if the talk in the slave pens could be believed, Meereen remained a free city for the nonce. Within  those crumbling walls, slavery and the slave trade were still forbidden. All he had to do was reach those  gates and pass beyond, and he would be a free man again.  But that was hardly possible unless he abandoned Penny. She’d want to take the dog and the pig  along.  “It won’t be so terrible, will it?” Penny whispered. “He paid so much for us. He’ll be kind, won’t  he?”   So long as we amuse him. “We’re too valuable to mistreat,” he reassured her, with blood still  trickling down his back from those last two lashes. When our show grows stale, however … and it does, it  does grow stale …  Their master’s overseer was waiting to take charge of them, with a mule cart and two soldiers.  He had a long narrow face and a chin beard bound about with golden wire, and his stiff red-black hair  swept out from his temples to form a pair of taloned hands. “What darling little creatures you are,” he  said. “You remind me of my own children … or would, if my little ones were not dead. I shall take good  care of you. Tell me your names.”  “Penny.” Her voice was a whisper, small and scared.  Tyrion, of House Lannister, rightful lord of Casterly Rock, you sniveling worm. “Yollo.”  “Bold Yollo. Bright Penny. You are the property of the noble and valorous Yezzan zo Qaggaz,  scholar and warrior, revered amongst the Wise Masters of Yunkai. Count yourselves fortunate, for  Yezzan is a kindly and benevolent master. Think of him as you would your father.”  Gladly, thought Tyrion, but this time he held his tongue. They would have to perform for their  new master soon enough, he did not doubt, and he could not take another lash.  “Your father loves his special treasures best of all, and he will cherish you,” the overseer was  saying. “And me, think of me as you would the nurse who cared for you when you were small. Nurse is  what all my children call me.”  “Lot ninety-nine,” the auctioneer called. “A warrior.”  The girl had sold quickly and was being bundled off to her new owner, clutching her clothing to  small, pink-tipped breasts. Two slavers dragged Jorah Mormont onto the block to take her place. The  knight was naked but for a breechclout, his back raw from the whip, his face so swollen as to be almost  unrecognizable. Chains bound his wrists and ankles. A little taste of the meal he cooked for me, Tyrion  thought, yet he found that he could take no pleasure from the big knight’s miseries.  Even in chains, Mormont looked dangerous, a hulking brute with big, thick arms and sloped  shoulders. All that coarse dark hair on his chest made him look more beast than man. Both his eyes were  blackened, two dark pits in that grotesquely swollen face. Upon one cheek he bore a brand: a demon’s  mask.  When the slavers had swarmed aboard the Selaesori Qhoran, Ser Jorah had met them with  longsword in hand, slaying three before they overwhelmed him. Their shipmates would gladly have  killed him, but the captain forbade it; a fighter was always worth good silver. So Mormont had been  chained to an oar, beaten within an inch of his life, starved, and branded.  “Big and strong, this one,” the auctioneer declared. “Plenty of piss in him. He’ll give a good show  in the fighting pits. Who will start me out at three hundred?”   No one would.  Mormont paid no mind to the mongrel crowd; his eyes were fixed beyond the siege lines, on the  distant city with its ancient walls of many-colored brick. Tyrion could read that look as easy as a book: so  near and yet so distant. The poor wretch had returned too late. Daenerys Targaryen was wed, the  guards on the pens had told them, laughing. She had taken a Meereenese slaver as her king, as wealthy  as he was noble, and when the peace was signed and sealed the fighting pits of Meereen would open  once again. Other slaves insisted that the guards were lying, that Daenerys Targaryen would never make  peace with slavers. Mhysa, they called her. Someone told him that meant Mother. Soon the silver queen  would come forth from her city, smash the Yunkai’i, and break their chains, they whispered to one  another.  And then she’ll bake us all a lemon pie and kiss our widdle wounds and make them better, the  dwarf thought. He had no faith in royal rescues. If need be, he would see to their deliverance himself.  The mushrooms jammed into the toe of his boot should be sufficient for both him and Penny. Crunch  and Pretty Pig would need to fend for themselves.  Nurse was still lecturing his master’s new prizes. “Do all you are told and nothing more, and you  shall live like little lords, pampered and adored,” he promised. “Disobey … but you would never do that,  would you? Not my sweetlings.” He reached down and pinched Penny on her cheek.  “Two hundred, then,” the auctioneer said. “A big brute like this, he’s worth three times as much.  What a bodyguard he will make! No enemy will dare molest you!”  “Come, my little friends,” Nurse said, “I will show you to your new home. In Yunkai you will  dwell in the golden pyramid of Qaggaz and dine off silver plates, but here we live simply, in the humble  tents of soldiers.”  “Who will give me one hundred?” cried the auctioneer.  That drew a bid at last, though it was only fifty silvers. The bidder was a thin man in a leather  apron.  “And one,” said the crone in the violet tokar.  One of the soldiers lifted Penny onto the back of the mule cart. “Who is the old woman?” the  dwarf asked him.  “Zahrina,” the man said. “Cheap fighters, hers. Meat for heroes. Your friend dead soon.”  He was no friend to me. Yet Tyrion Lannister found himself turning to Nurse and saying, “You  cannot let her have him.”  Nurse squinted at him. “What is this noise you make?”   Tyrion pointed. “That one is part of our show. The bear and the maiden fair. Jorah is the bear,  Penny is the maiden, I am the brave knight who rescues her. I dance about and hit him in the balls. Very  funny.”  The overseer squinted at the auction block. “Him?” The bidding for Jorah Mormont had reached  two hundred silvers.  “And one,” said the crone in the violet tokar. “Your bear. I see.” Nurse went scuttling off through  the crowd, bent over the huge yellow Yunkishman in his litter, whispered in his ear. His master nodded,  chins wobbling, then raised his fan. “Three hundred,” he called out in a wheezy voice.  The crone sniffed and turned away. “Why did you do that?” Penny asked, in the Common  Tongue.  A fair question, thought Tyrion. Why did I? “Your show was growing dull. Every mummer needs a  dancing bear.”  She gave him a reproachful look, then retreated to the back of the cart and sat with her arms  around Crunch, as if the dog was her last true friend in the world. Perhaps he is.  Nurse returned with Jorah Mormont. Two of their master’s slave soldiers flung him into the back  of the mule cart between the dwarfs. The knight did not struggle. All the fight went out of him when he  heard that his queen had wed, Tyrion realized. One whispered word had done what fists and whips and  clubs could not; it had broken him. I should have let the crone have him. He’s going to be as useful as  nipples on a breastplate.  Nurse climbed onto the front of the mule cart and took up the reins, and they set off through  the siege camp to the compound of their new master, the noble Yezzan zo Qaggaz. Four slave soldiers  marched beside them, two on either side of the cart.  Penny did not weep, but her eyes were red and miserable, and she never lifted them from  Crunch. Does she think all this might fade away if she does not look at it? Ser Jorah Mormont looked at  no one and nothing. He sat huddled, brooding in his chains.  Tyrion looked at everything and everyone.  The Yunkish encampment was not one camp but a hundred camps raised up cheek by jowl in a  crescent around the walls of Meereen, a city of silk and canvas with its own avenues and alleys, taverns  and trollops, good districts and bad. Between the siege lines and the bay, tents had sprouted up like  yellow mushrooms. Some were small and mean, no more than a flap of old stained canvas to keep off  the rain and sun, but beside them stood barracks tents large enough to sleep a hundred men and silken  pavilions as big as palaces with harpies gleaming atop their roof poles. Some camps were orderly, with  the tents arrayed around a fire pit in concentric circles, weapons and armor stacked around the inner  ring, horse lines outside. Elsewhere, pure chaos seemed to reign.   The dry, scorched plains around Meereen were flat and bare and treeless for long leagues, but  the Yunkish ships had brought lumber and hides up from the south, enough to raise six huge trebuchets.  They were arrayed on three sides of the city, all but the river side, surrounded by piles of broken stone  and casks of pitch and resin just waiting for a torch. One of the soldiers walking along beside the cart  saw where Tyrion was looking and proudly told him that each of the trebuchets had been given a name:  Dragonbreaker, Harridan, Harpy’s Daughter, Wicked Sister, Ghost of Astapor, Mazdhan’s Fist. Towering  above the tents to a height of forty feet, the trebuchets were the siege camp’s chief landmarks. “Just the  sight of them drove the dragon queen to her knees,” he boasted. “And there she will stay, sucking  Hizdahr’s noble cock, else we smash her walls to rubble.”  Tyrion saw a slave being whipped, blow after blow, until his back was nothing but blood and raw  meat. A file of men marched past in irons, clanking with every step; they carried spears and wore short  swords, but chains linked them wrist to wrist and ankle to ankle. The air smelled of roasting meat, and  he saw one man skinning a dog for his stewpot.  He saw the dead as well, and heard the dying. Under the drifting smoke, the smell of horses, and  the sharp salt tang of the bay was a stink of blood and shit. Some flux, he realized, as he watched two  sellswords carry the corpse of a third from one of the tents. That made his fingers twitch. Disease could  wipe out an army quicker than any battle, he had heard his father say once.  All the more reason to escape, and soon.  A quarter mile on, he found good reason to reconsider. A crowd had formed around three slaves  taken whilst trying to escape. “I know my little treasures will be sweet and obedient,” Nurse said. “See  what befalls ones who try to run.”  The captives had been tied to a row of crossbeams, and a pair of sling-ers were using them to  test their skills. “Tolosi,” one of the guards told them. “The best slingers in the world. They throw soft  lead balls in place of stones.”  Tyrion had never seen the point of slings, when bows had so much better range … but he had  never seen Tolosi at work before. Their lead balls did vastly more damage then the smooth stones other  slingers used, and more than any bow as well. One struck the knee of one of the captives, and it burst  apart in a gout of blood and bone that left the man’s lower leg dangling by a rope of dark red tendon.  Well, he won’t run again, Tyrion allowed, as the man began to scream. His shrieks mingled in the  morning air with the laughter of camp followers and the curses of those who’d wagered good coin that  the slinger would miss. Penny looked away, but Nurse grasped her under the chin and twisted her head  back around. “Watch,” he commanded. “You too, bear.”  Jorah Mormont raised his head and stared at Nurse. Tyrion could see the tightness in his arms.  He’s going to throttle him, and that will be the end for all of us. But the knight only grimaced, then  turned to watch the bloody show.   To the east the massive brick walls of Meereen shimmered through the morning heat. That was  the refuge these poor fools had hoped to reach. How long will it remain a refuge, though?  All three of the would-be escapees were dead before Nurse gathered up the reins again. The  mule cart rumbled on.  Their master’s camp was south and east of the Harridan, almost in its shadow, and spread over  several acres. The humble tent of Yezzan zo Qaggaz proved to be a palace of lemon-colored silk. Gilded  harpies stood atop the center poles of each of its nine peaked roofs, shining in the sun. Lesser tents  ringed it on all sides. “Those are the dwellings of our noble master’s cooks, concubines, and warriors,  and a few less-favored kinsmen,” Nurse told them, “but you little darlings shall have the rare privilege of  sleeping within Yezzan’s own pavilion. It pleases him to keep his treasures close.” He frowned at  Mormont. “Not you, bear. You are big and ugly, you will be chained outside.” The knight did not  respond. “First, all of you must be fitted for collars.”  The collars were made of iron, lightly gilded to make them glitter in the light. Yezzan’s name was  incised into the metal in Valyrian glyphs, and a pair of tiny bells were affixed below the ears, so the  wearer’s every step produced a merry little tinkling sound. Jorah Mormont accepted his collar in a sullen  silence, but Penny began to cry as the armorer was fastening her own into place. “It’s so heavy,” she  complained.  Tyrion squeezed her hand. “It’s solid gold,” he lied. “In Westeros, high-born ladies dream of such  a necklace.” Better a collar than a brand. A collar can be removed. He remembered Shae, and the way  the golden chain had glimmered as he twisted it tighter and tighter about her throat.  Afterward, Nurse had Ser Jorah’s chains fastened to a stake near the cookfire whilst he escorted  the two dwarfs inside the master’s pavilion and showed them where they would sleep, in a carpeted  alcove separated from the main tent by walls of yellow silk. They would share this space with Yezzan’s  other treasures: a boy with twisted, hairy “goat legs,” a two-headed girl out of Mantarys, a bearded  woman, and a willowy creature called Sweets who dressed in moonstones and Myrish lace. “You are  trying to decide if I’m a man or woman,” Sweets said, when she was brought before the dwarfs. Then  she lifted her skirts and showed them what was underneath. “I’m both, and master loves me best.”  A grotesquerie, Tyrion realized. Somewhere some god is laughing. “Lovely,” he said to Sweets,  who had purple hair and violet eyes, “but we were hoping to be the pretty ones for once.”  Sweets sniggered, but Nurse was not amused. “Save your japes for this evening, when you  perform for our noble master. If you please him, you will be well rewarded. If not …” He slapped Tyrion  across the face.  “You will want to be careful with Nurse,” said Sweets when the overseer had departed. “He is  the only true monster here.” The bearded woman spoke an incomprehensible variety of Ghiscari, the  goat boy some guttural sailor’s pidgin called the trade talk. The two-headed girl was feeble-minded; one  head was no bigger than an orange and did not speak at all, the other had filed teeth and was like to   growl at anyone who came too close to her cage. But Sweets was fluent in four tongues, one of them  High Valyrian.  “What is the master like?” Penny asked, anxiously. “His eyes are yellow, and he stinks,” said  Sweets. “Ten years ago he went to Sothoros, and he has been rotting from the inside out ever since.  Make him forget that he is dying, even for a little while, and he can be most generous. Deny him  nothing.”  They had only the afternoon to learn the ways of chattel. Yezzan’s body slaves filled a tub with  hot water, and the dwarfs were allowed to bathe— Penny first, then Tyrion. Afterward another slave  spread a stinging ointment across the cuts on his back to keep them from mortifying, then covered them  with a cool poultice. Penny’s hair was cut, and Tyrion’s beard got a trim. They were given soft slippers  and fresh clothing, plain but clean.  As evening fell, Nurse returned to tell them that it was time to don their mummer’s plate.  Yezzan would be hosting the Yunkish supreme commander, the noble Yurkhaz zo Yunzak, and they  would be expected to perform. “Shall we unchain your bear?”  “Not this night,” Tyrion said. “Let us joust for our master first and save the bear for some other  time.”  “Just so. After your capers are concluded, you will help serve and pour. See that you do not spill  on the guests, or it will go ill for you.”  A juggler began the evening’s frolics. Then came a trio of energetic tumblers. After them the  goat-legged boy came out and did a grotesque jig whilst one of Yurkhaz’s slaves played on a bone flute.  Tyrion had half a mind to ask him if he knew “The Rains of Castamere.” As they waited their own turn to  perform, he watched Yezzan and his guests. The human prune in the place of honor was evidently the  Yunkish supreme commander, who looked about as formidable as a loose stool. A dozen other Yunkish  lords attended him. Two sellsword captains were on hand as well, each accompanied by a dozen men of  his company. One was an elegant Pentoshi, grey-haired and clad in silk but for his cloak, a ragged thing  sewn from dozens of strips of torn, bloodstained cloth. The other captain was the man who’d tried to  buy them that morning, the brown-skinned bidder with the salt-and-pepper beard. “Brown Ben Plumm,”  Sweets named him. “Captain of the Second Sons.”  A Westerosi, and a Plumm. Better and better. “You are next,” Nurse informed them. “Be  amusing, my little darlings, or you will wish you had.”  Tyrion had not mastered half of Groat’s old tricks, but he could ride the sow, fall off when he  was meant to, roll, and pop back onto his feet. All of that proved well received. The sight of little people  running about drunk-enly and whacking at one another with wooden weapons appeared to be just as  hilarious in a siege camp by Slaver’s Bay as at Joffrey’s wedding feast in King’s Landing. Contempt,  thought Tyrion, the universal tongue.   Their master Yezzan laughed loudest and longest whenever one of his dwarfs suffered a fall or  took a blow, his whole vast body shaking like suet in an earthquake; his guests waited to see how  Yurkhaz no Yunzak responded before joining in. The supreme commander appeared so frail that Tyrion  was afraid laughing might kill him. When Penny’s helm was struck off and flew into the lap of a  sour-faced Yunkishman in a striped green-and-gold tokar, Yurkhaz cackled like a chicken. When said lord  reached inside the helm and drew out a large purple melon dribbling pulp, he wheezed until his face  turned the same color as the fruit. He turned to his host and whispered something that made their  master chortle and lick his lips … though there was a hint of anger in those slitted yellow eyes, it seemed  to Tyrion.  Afterward the dwarfs stripped off their wooden armor and the sweat-soaked clothing beneath  and changed into the fresh yellow tunics that had been provided them for serving. Tyrion was given a  flagon of purple wine, Penny a flagon of water. They moved about the tent filling cups, their slippered  feet whispering over thick carpets. It was harder work than it appeared. Before long his legs were  cramping badly, and one of the cuts on his back had begun to bleed again, the red seeping through the  yellow linen of his tunic. Tyrion bit his tongue and kept on pouring.  Most of the guests paid them no more mind than they did the other slaves … but one  Yunkishman declared drunkenly that Yezzan should make the two dwarfs fuck, and another demanded  to know how Tyrion had lost his nose. I shoved it up your wife’s cunt and she bit it off, he almost replied  … but the storm had persuaded him that he did not want to die as yet, so instead he said, “It was cut off  to punish me for insolence, lord.”  Then a lord in a blue tokar fringed with tiger’s eyes recalled that Tyrion had boasted of his skill  at cyvasse on the auction block. “Let us put him to the test,” he said. A table and set of pieces was duly  produced. A scant few moments later, the red-faced lord shoved the table over in fury, scattering the  pieces across the carpets to the sound of Yunkish laughter.  “You should have let him win,” Penny whispered.  Brown Ben Plumm lifted the fallen table, smiling. “Try me next, dwarf. When I was younger, the  Second Sons took contract with Volantis. I learned the game there.”  “I am only a slave. My noble master decides when and who I play.” Tyrion turned to Yezzan.  “Master?”  The yellow lord seemed amused by the notion. “What stakes do you propose, Captain?”  “If I win, give this slave to me,” said Plumm. “No,” Yezzan zo Qaggaz said. “But if you can defeat  my dwarf, you may have the price I paid for him, in gold.”  “Done,” the sellsword said. The scattered pieces were picked up off the carpet, and they sat  down to play.   Tyrion won the first game. Plumm took the second, for double the stakes. As they set up for  their third contest, the dwarf studied his opponent. Brown-skinned, his cheeks and jaw covered by a  close-cropped bristly beard of grey and white, his face creased by a thousand wrinkles and a few old  scars, Plumm had an amiable look to him, especially when he smiled. The faithful retainer, Tyrion  decided. Every man’s favorite nuncle, full of chuckles and old sayings and roughspun wisdom. It was all  sham. Those smiles never touched Plumm’s eyes, where greed hid behind a veil of caution. Hungry, but  wary, this one.  The sellsword was nearly as bad a player as the Yunkish lord had been, but his play was stolid  and tenacious rather than bold. His opening arrays were different every time, yet all the  same—conservative, defensive, passive. He does not play to win, Tyrion realized. He plays so as not to  lose. It worked in their second game, when the little man overreached himself with an unsound assault.  It did not work in the third game, nor the fourth, nor the fifth, which proved to be their last.  Near the end of that final contest, with his fortress in ruins, his dragon dead, elephants before  him and heavy horse circling round his rear, Plumm looked up smiling and said, “Yollo wins again. Death  in four.”  “Three.” Tyrion tapped his dragon. “I was lucky. Perhaps you should give my head a good rub  before our next game, Captain. Some of that luck might rub off on your fingers.” You will still lose, but  you might give me a better game. Grinning, he pushed back from the cyvasse table, picked up his wine  flagon, and returned to pouring with Yezzan zo Qaggaz considerably richer and Brown Ben Plumm  considerably impoverished. His gargantuan master had fallen off into drunken sleep during the third  game, his goblet slipping from his yellowed fingers to spill its contents on the carpet, but perhaps he  would be pleased when he awakened.  When the supreme commander Yurkhaz zo Yunzak departed, supported by a pair of burly  slaves, that seemed to be a general signal for the other guests to take their leaves as well. After the tent  had emptied out, Nurse reappeared to tell the servers that they might make their own feast from the  leavings. “Eat quickly. All this must be clean again before you sleep.”  Tyrion was on his knees, his legs aching and his bloody back screaming with pain, trying to scrub  out the stain that the noble Yezzan’s spilled wine had left upon the noble Yezzan’s carpet, when the  overseer tapped his cheek gently with the end of his whip. “Yollo. You have done well. You and your  wife.”  “She is not my wife.”  “Your whore, then. On your feet, both of you.”  Tyrion rose unsteadily, one leg trembling beneath him. His thighs were knots, so cramped that  Penny had to lend him a hand to pull him to his feet. “What have we done?”  “Much and more,” said the overseer. “Nurse said you would be rewarded if you pleased your  father, did he not? Though the noble Yezzan is loath to lose his little treasures, as you have seen,   Yurkhaz zo Yunzak persuaded him that it would be selfish to keep such droll antics to himself. Rejoice!  To celebrate the signing of the peace, you shall have the honor of jousting in the Great Pit of Daznak.  Thousands will come see you! Tens of thousands! And, oh, how we shall laugh!”   The healer entered the tent murmuring pleasantries, but one sniff of the foul air and a glance at  Yezzan zo Qaggaz put an end to that. “The pale mare,” the man told Sweets.  What a surprise, Tyrion thought. Who could have guessed? Aside from any man with a nose and  me with half of one. Yezzan was burning with fever, squirming fitfully in a pool of his own excrement. His  shit had turned to brown slime streaked with blood … and it fell to Yollo and Penny to wipe his yellow  bottom clean. Even with assistance, their master could not lift his own weight; it took all his failing  strength to roll onto one side.  “My arts will not avail here,” the healer announced. “The noble Yezzan’s life is in the hands of  the gods. Keep him cool if you can. Some say that helps. Bring him water.” Those afflicted by the pale  mare were always thirsty, drinking gallons between their shits. “Clean fresh water, as much as he will  drink.”  “Not river water,” said Sweets. “By no means.” And with that, the healer fled.  We need to flee as well, thought Tyrion. He was a slave in a golden collar, with little bells that  tinkled cheerfully with every step he took. One of Yezzan’s special treasures. An honor indistinguishable  from a death warrant. Yezzan zo Qaggaz liked to keep his darlings close, so it had fallen to Yollo and  Penny and Sweets and his other treasures to attend him when he grew sick.  Poor old Yezzan. The lord of suet was not so bad as masters went. Sweets had been right about  that. Serving at his nightly banquets, Tyrion had soon learned that Yezzan stood foremost amongst  those Yunkish lords who favored honoring the peace with Meereen. Most of the others were only biding  their time, waiting for the armies of Volantis to arrive. A few wanted to assault the city immediately, lest  the Volantenes rob them of their glory and the best part of the plunder. Yezzan would have no part of  that. Nor would he consent to returning Meereen’s hostages by way of trebuchet, as the sellsword  Bloodbeard had proposed.  But much and more can change in two days. Two days ago Nurse had been hale and healthy.  Two days ago Yezzan had not heard the pale mare’s ghostly hoofbeats. Two days ago the fleets of Old  Volantis had been two days farther off. And now …  “Is Yezzan going to die?” Penny asked, in that please-say-it-is-not-so voice of hers.  “We are all going to die.”  “Of the flux, I meant.”  Sweets gave them both a desperate look. “Yezzan must not die.” The hermaphrodite stroked the  brow of their gargantuan master, pushing back his sweat-damp hair. The Yunkishman moaned, and  another flood of brown water gushed down his legs. His bedding was stained and stinking, but they had  no way to move him.  “Some masters free their slaves when they die,” said Penny.   Sweets tittered. It was a ghastly sound. “Only favorites. They free them from the woes of the  world, to accompany their beloved master to the grave and serve him in the afterlife.”  Sweets should know. His will be the first throat slit.  The goat boy spoke up. “The silver queen—”  “—is dead,” insisted Sweets. “Forget her! The dragon took her across the river. She’s drowned in  that Dothraki sea.”  “You can’t drown in grass,” the goat boy said. “If we were free,” said Penny, “we could find the  queen. Or go search for her, at least.”  You on your dog and me on my sow, chasing a dragon across the Dothraki sea. Tyrion scratched  his scar to keep from laughing. “This particular dragon has already evinced a fondness for roast pork.  And roast dwarf is twice as tasty.”  “It was just a wish,” said Penny wistfully. “We could sail away. There are ships again, now that  the war is over.”  Is it? Tyrion was inclined to doubt that. Parchments had been signed, but wars were not fought  on parchments.  “We could sail to Qarth,” Penny went on. “The streets are paved with jade there, my brother  always said. The city walls are one of the wonders of the world. When we perform in Qarth, gold and  silver will rain down on us, you’ll see.”  “Some of those ships out on the bay are Qartheen,” Tyrion reminded her. “Lomas Longstrider  saw the walls of Qarth. His books suffice for me. I have gone as far east as I intend to go.”  Sweets dabbed at Yezzan’s fevered face with a damp cloth. “Yezzan must live. Or we all die with  him. The pale mare does not carry off every rider. The master will recover.”  That was a bald-faced lie. It would be a wonder if Yezzan lived another day. The lord of suet was  already dying from whatever hideous disease he had brought back from Sothoryos, it seemed to Tyrion.  This would just hasten his end. A mercy, really. But not the sort the dwarf craved for himself. “The  healer said he needs fresh water. We will see to that.”  “That is good of you.” Sweets sounded numb. It was more than just fear of having her throat  cut; alone amongst Yezzan’s treasures, she actually seemed fond of their immense master.  “Penny, come with me.” Tyrion opened the tent flap and ushered her out into the heat of a  Meereenese morning. The air was muggy and oppressive, yet still a welcome relief from the miasma of  sweat, shit, and sickness that filled the inside of Yezzan’s palatial pavilion.  “Water will help the master,” Penny said. “That’s what the healer said, it must be so. Sweet  fresh water.”   “Sweet fresh water didn’t help Nurse.” Poor old Nurse. Yezzan’s soldiers had tossed him onto  the corpse wagon last night at dusk, another victim of the pale mare. When men are dying every hour,  no one looks too hard at one more dead man, especially one as well despised as Nurse. Yezzan’s other  slaves had refused to go near the overseer once the cramps began, so it was left to Tyrion to keep him  warm and bring him drinks. Watered wine and lemonsweet and some nice hot dogtail soup, with slivers  of mushroom in the broth. Drink it down, Nursey, that shitwater squirting from your arse needs to be  replaced. The last word Nurse ever said was, “No.” The last words he ever heard were, “A Lannister  always pays his debts.”  Tyrion had kept the truth of that from Penny, but she needed to understand how things stood  with their master. “If Yezzan lives to see the sunrise, I’ll be stunned.”  She clutched his arm. “What will happen to us?”  “He has heirs. Nephews.” Four such had come with Yezzan from Yunkai to command his slave  soldiers. One was dead, slain by Targaryen sellswords during a sortie. The other three would divide the  yellow enormity’s slaves amongst them, like as not. Whether any of the nephews shared Yezzan’s  fondness for cripples, freaks, and grotesques was far less certain. “One of them may inherit us. Or we  could end up back on the auction block.”  “No.” Her eyes got big. “Not that. Please.”  “It is not a prospect I relish either.”  A few yards away, six of Yezzan’s slave soldiers were squatting in the dust, throwing the bones  and passing a wineskin from hand to hand. One was the serjeant called Scar, a black-tempered brute  with a head as smooth as stone and the shoulders of an ox. Clever as an ox too, Tyrion recalled.  He waddled toward them. “Scar,” he barked out, “the noble Yezzan has need of fresh, clean  water. Take two men and bring back as many pails as you can carry. And be quick about it.”  The soldiers broke off their game. Scar rose to his feet, brow beetling. “What did you say,  dwarf? Who do you think you are?”  “You know who I am. Yollo. One of our lord’s treasures. Now do as I told you.”  The soldiers laughed. “Go on, Scar,” one mocked, “and be quick about it. Yezzan’s monkey gave  you a command.”  “You do not tell soldiers what to do,” Scar said. “Soldiers?” Tyrion affected puzzlement. “Slaves,  is what I see. You wear a collar round your neck the same as me.”  The savage backhand blow Scar dealt him knocked him to the ground and broke his lip.  “Yezzan’s collar. Not yours.”   Tyrion wiped the blood from his split lip with the back of his hand. When he tried to rise, one leg  went out from under him, and he stumbled back onto his knees. He needed Penny’s help to regain his  feet. “Sweets said the master must have water,” he said in his best whine.  “Sweets can go fuck himself. He’s made for it. We don’t take commands from that freak  neither.”  No, thought Tyrion. Even amongst slaves there were lords and peasants, as he had been quick to  learn. The hermaphrodite had long been their master’s special pet, indulged and favored, and the noble  Yezzan’s other slaves hated him for it.  The soldiers were accustomed to taking their commands from their masters and their overseer.  But Nurse was dead and Yezzan too sick to name a successor. As for the three nephews, those brave  free men had remembered urgent business elsewhere at the first sound of the pale mare’s hooves.  “The w-water,” said Tyrion, cringing. “Not river water, the healer said. Clean, fresh well water.”  Scar grunted. “You go for it. And be quick about it.”  “Us?” Tyrion exchanged a hopeless glance with Penny. “Water’s heavy. We’re not so strong as  you. Can we … can we take the mule cart?”  “Take your legs.”  “We’ll need to make a dozen trips.”  “Make a hundred trips. It’s no shit to me.”  “Just the two of us … we won’t be able to carry all the water that the master needs.”  “Take your bear,” suggested Scar. “Fetching water is about all that one is good for.”  Tyrion backed away. “As you say, master.”  Scar grinned. Master. Oh, he liked that. “Morgo, bring the keys. You fill the pails and come right  back, dwarf. You know what happens to slaves who try to escape.”  “Bring the pails,” Tyrion told Penny. He went off with the man Morgo to fetch Ser Jorah  Mormont from his cage.  The knight had not adapted well to bondage. When called upon to play the bear and carry off  the maiden fair, he had been sullen and uncooperative, shuffling lifelessly through his paces when he  deigned to take part in their mummery at all. Though he had not attempted escape, nor offered violence  to his captors, he would ignore their commands oft as not or reply with muttered curses. None of this  had amused Nurse, who made his displeasure clear by confining Mormont in an iron cage and having  him beaten every evening as the sun sank into Slaver’s Bay. The knight absorbed the beatings silently;   the only sounds were the muttered curses of the slaves who beat him and the dull thuds of their clubs  pounding against Ser Jorah’s bruised and battered flesh.  The man is a shell, Tyrion thought, the first time he saw the big knight beaten. I should have held  my tongue and let Zahrina have him. It might have been a kinder fate than this.  Mormont emerged from the cramped confines of the cage bent and squinting, with both eyes  blackened and his back crusty with dried blood. His face was so bruised and swollen that he hardly  looked human. He was naked except for a breechclout, a filthy bit of yellow rag. “You’re to help them  carry water,” Morgo told him.  Ser Jorah’s only reply was a sullen stare. Some men would sooner die free than live a slave, I  suppose. Tyrion was not stricken with that affliction himself, thankfully, but if Mormont murdered  Morgo, the other slaves might not draw that distinction. “Come,” he said, before the knight did  something brave and stupid. He waddled off and hoped Mormont would follow.  The gods were good for once. Mormont followed.  Two pails for Penny, two for Tyrion, and four for Ser Jorah, two in either hand. The nearest well  was south and west of the Harridan, so they set off in that direction, the bells on their collars ringing  merrily with every step. No one paid them any mind. They were just slaves fetching water for their  master. Wearing a collar conferred certain advantages, particularly a gilded collar inscribed with the  name of Yezzan zo Qaggaz. The chime of those little bells proclaimed their value to anyone with ears. A  slave was only as important as his master; Yezzan was the richest man in the Yellow City and had  brought six hundred slave soldiers to the war, even if he did look like a monstrous yellow slug and smell  of piss. Their collars gave them leave to go anywhere they might wish within the camp.  Until Yezzan dies.  The Clanker Lords had their slave soldiers drilling in the nearest field. The clatter of the chains  that bound them made a harsh metallic music as they marched across the sand in lockstep and formed  up with their long spears. Elsewhere teams of slaves were raising ramps of stone and sand beneath their  mangonels and scorpions, angling them upward at the sky, the better to defend the camp should the  black dragon return. It made the dwarf smile to see them sweating and cursing as they wrestled the  heavy machines onto the inclines. Crossbows were much in evidence as well. Every other man seemed  to be clutching one, with a quiverfull of bolts hanging from his hip.  If anyone had thought to ask him, Tyrion could have told them not to bother. Unless one of  those long iron scorpion bolts chanced to find an eye, the queen’s pet monster was not like to be  brought down by such toys. Dragons are not so easy to kill as that. Tickle him with these and you’ll only  make him angry.  The eyes were where a dragon was most vulnerable. The eyes, and the brain behind them. Not  the underbelly, as certain old tales would have it. The scales there were just as tough as those along a  dragon’s back and flanks. And not down the gullet either. That was madness. These would-be   dragonslayers might as well try to quench a fire with a spear thrust. “Death comes out of the dragon’s  mouth,” Septon Barth had written in his Unnatural History, “but death does not go in that way.”  Farther on, two legions from New Ghis were facing off shield wall to shield wall whilst serjeants  in iron halfhelms with horsehair crests screamed commands in their own incomprehensible dialect. To  the naked eye the Ghiscari looked more formidable than the Yunkish slave soldiers, but Tyrion nursed  doubts. The legionaries might be armed and organized in the same manner as Unsullied … but the  eunuchs knew no other life, whereas the Ghiscari were free citizens who served for three-year terms.  The line at the well stretched back a quarter mile.  There were only a handful of wells within a day’s march of Meereen, so the wait was always  long. Most of the Yunkish host drew their drinking water from the Skahazadhan, which Tyrion had  known was a very bad idea even before the healer’s warning. The clever ones took care to stay  upstream of the latrines, but they were still downstream of the city.  The fact that there were any good wells at all within a day’s march of the city only went to prove  that Daenerys Targaryen was still an innocent where siegecraft was concerned. She should have  poisoned every well. Then all the Yunkishmen would be drinking from the river. See how long their siege  lasts then. That was what his lord father would have done, Tyrion did not doubt.  Every time they shuffled forward another place, the bells on their collars tinkled brightly. Such a  happy sound, it makes me want to scoop out someone’s eyeballs with a spoon. By now Griff and Duck  and Haldon Half-maester should be in Westeros with their young prince. I should be with them … but no,  I had to have a whore. Kinslaying was not enough, I needed cunt and wine to seal my ruin, and here I am  on the wrong side of the world, wearing a slave collar with little golden bells to announce my coming. If I  dance just right, maybe I can ring “The Rains of Castamere.”  There was no better place to hear the latest news and rumors than around the well. “I know  what I saw,” an old slave in a rusted iron collar was saying, as Tyrion and Penny shuffled along in the  queue, “and I saw that dragon ripping off arms and legs, tearing men in half, burning them down to ash  and bones. People started running, trying to get out of that pit, but I come to see a show, and by all the  gods of Ghis, I saw one. I was up in the purple, so I didn’t think the dragon was like to trouble me.”  “The queen climbed onto the dragon’s back and flew away,” insisted a tall brown woman.  “She tried,” said the old man, “but she couldn’t hold on. The cross-bows wounded the dragon,  and the queen was struck right between her sweet pink teats, I hear. That was when she fell. She died in  the gutter, crushed beneath a wagon’s wheels. I know a girl who knows a man who saw her die.”  In this company, silence was the better part of wisdom, but Tyrion could not help himself. “No  corpse was found,” he said.  The old man frowned. “What would you know about it?”   “They were there,” said the brown woman. “It’s them, the jousting dwarfs, the ones who tilted  for the queen.”  The old man squinted down as if seeing him and Penny for the first time. “You’re the ones who  rode the pigs.”  Our notoriety precedes us. Tyrion sketched a courtly bow, and refrained from pointing out that  one of the pigs was really a dog. “The sow I ride is actually my sister. We have the same nose, could you  tell? A wizard cast a spell on her, but if you give her a big wet kiss, she will turn into a beautiful woman.  The pity is, once you get to know her, you’ll want to kiss her again to turn her back.”  Laughter erupted all around them. Even the old man joined in. “You saw her, then,” said the  redheaded boy behind them. “You saw the queen. Is she as beautiful as they say?”  I saw a slender girl with silvery hair wrapped in a tokar, he might have told them. Her face was  veiled, and I never got close enough for a good look. I was riding on a pig. Daenerys Targaryen had been  seated in the owner’s box beside her Ghiscari king, but Tyrion’s eyes had been drawn to the knight in  the white-and-gold armor behind her. Though his features were concealed, the dwarf would have  known Barristan Selmy anywhere. Illyrio was right about that much, at least, he remembered thinking.  Will Selmy know me, though? And what will he do if he does?  He had almost revealed himself then and there, but something stopped him—caution,  cowardice, instinct, call it what you will. He could not imagine Barristan the Bold greeting him with  anything but hostility. Selmy had never approved of Jaime’s presence in his precious Kingsguard. Before  the rebellion, the old knight thought him too young and untried; afterward, he had been known to say  that the Kingslayer should exchange that white cloak for a black one. And his own crimes were worse.  Jaime had killed a madman. Tyrion had put a quarrel through the groin of his own sire, a man Ser  Barristan had known and served for years. He might have chanced it all the same, but then Penny had  landed a blow on his shield and the moment was gone, never to return.  “The queen watched us tilt,” Penny was telling the other slaves in line, “but that was the only  time we saw her.”  “You must have seen the dragon,” said the old man.  Would that we had. The gods had not even vouchsafed him that much. As Daenerys Targaryen  was taking wing, Nurse had been clapping irons round their ankles to make certain they would not  attempt escape on their way back to their master. If the overseer had only taken his leave after  delivering them to the abbatoir, or fled with the rest of the slavers when the dragon descended from the  sky, the two dwarfs might have strolled away free. Or run away, more like, our little bells a-jingle.  “Was there a dragon?” Tyrion said with a shrug. “All I know is that no dead queens were found.”   The old man was not convinced. “Ah, they found corpses by the hundred. They dragged them  inside the pit and burned them, though half was crisp already. Might be they didn’t know her, burned  and bloody and crushed. Might be they did but decided to say elsewise, to keep you slaves quiet.”  “Us slaves?” said the brown woman. “You wear a collar too.”  “Ghazdor’s collar,” the old man boasted. “Known him since we was born. I’m almost like a  brother to him. Slaves like you, sweepings out of Astapor and Yunkai, you whine about being free, but I  wouldn’t give the dragon queen my collar if she offered to suck my cock for it. Man has the right master,  that’s better.”  Tyrion did not dispute him. The most insidious thing about bondage was how easy it was to  grow accustomed to it. The life of most slaves was not all that different from the life of a serving man at  Casterly Rock, it seemed to him. True, some slaveowners and their overseers were brutal and cruel, but  the same was true of some Westerosi lords and their stewards and bailiffs. Most of the Yunkai’i treated  their chattels decently enough, so long as they did their jobs and caused no trouble … and this old man  in his rusted collar, with his fierce loyalty to Lord Wobblecheeks, his owner, was not at all atypical.  “Ghazdor the Great-hearted?” Tyrion said, sweetly. “Our master Yezzan has often spoken of his  wits.” What Yezzan had actually said was on the order of, I have more wits in the left cheek of my arse  than Ghazdor and his brothers have between them. He thought it prudent to omit the actual words.  Midday had come and gone before he and Penny reached the well, where a scrawny one-legged  slave was drawing water. He squinted at them suspiciously. “Nurse always comes for Yezzan’s water,  with four men and a mule cart.” He dropped the bucket down the well once more. There was a soft  splash. The one-legged man let the bucket fill, then began to draw it upward. His arms were sunburnt  and peeling, scrawny to look at but all muscle.  “The mule died,” said Tyrion. “So did Nurse, poor man. And now Yezzan himself has mounted  the pale mare, and six of his soldiers have the shits. May I have two pails full?”  “As you like.” That was the end of idle talk. Is that hoofbeats you hear? The lie about the soldiers  got old one-leg moving much more quickly.  They started back, each of the dwarfs carrying two brim-full pails of sweet water and Ser Jorah  with two pails in each hand. The day was growing hotter, the air as thick and wet as damp wool, and the  pails seemed to grow heavier with every step. A long walk on short legs. Water sloshed from his pails  with every stride, splashing round his legs, whilst his bells played a marching song. Had I known it would  come to this, Father, I might have let you live. Half a mile east, a dark plume of smoke was rising where a  tent had been set afire. Burning last night’s dead. “This way,” Tyrion said, jerking his head to the right.  Penny gave him a puzzled look. “That’s not how we came.”  “We don’t want to breathe that smoke. It’s full of malign humors.” It was not a lie. Not entirely.   Penny was soon puffing, struggling with the weight of her pails. “I need to rest.”  “As you wish.” Tyrion set the pails of water on the ground, grateful for the halt. His legs were  cramping badly, so he found himself a likely rock and sat on it to rub his thighs.  “I could do that for you,” offered Penny. “I know where the knots are.” As fond as he had grown  of the girl, it still made him uncomfortable when she touched him. He turned to Ser Jorah. “A few more  beatings and you’ll be uglier than I am, Mormont. Tell me, is there any fight left in you?”  The big knight raised two blackened eyes and looked at him as he might look at a bug. “Enough  to crack your neck, Imp.”  “Good.” Tyrion picked up his pails. “This way, then.”  Penny wrinkled her brow. “No. It’s to the left.” She pointed. “That’s the Harridan there.”  “And that’s the Wicked Sister.” Tyrion nodded in the other direction. “Trust me,” he said. “My  way is quicker.” He set off, his bells jingling. Penny would follow, he knew.  Sometimes he envied the girl all her pretty little dreams. She reminded him of Sansa Stark, the  child bride he had wed and lost. Despite the horrors Penny had suffered, she remained somehow  trusting. She should know better. She is older than Sansa. And she’s a dwarf. She acts as if she has  forgotten that, as if she were highborn and fair to look upon, instead of a slave in a grotesquerie. At  night Tyrion would oft hear her praying. A waste of words. If there are gods to listen, they are monstrous  gods who torment us for their sport. Who else would make a world like this, so full of bondage, blood,  and pain? Who else would shape us as they have? Some-times he wanted to slap her, shake her, scream  at her, anything to wake her from her dreams. No one is going to save us, he wanted to scream at her.  The worst is yet to come. Yet somehow he could never say the words. Instead of giving her a good hard  crack across that ugly face of hers to knock the blinders from her eyes, he would find himself squeezing  her shoulder or giving her a hug. Every touch a lie. I have paid her so much false coin that she half thinks  she’s rich.  He had even kept the truth of Daznak’s Pit from her.  Lions. They were going to set lions on us. It would have been exquisitely ironic, that. Perhaps he  would have had time for a short, bitter chortle before being torn apart.  No one ever told him the end that had been planned for them, not in so many words, but it had  not been hard to puzzle out, down beneath the bricks of Daznak’s Pit, in the hidden world below the  seats, the dark domain of the pit fighters and the serving men who tended to them, quick and  dead—the cooks who fed them, the ironmongers who armed them, the barber-surgeons who bled them  and shaved them and bound up their wounds, the whores who serviced them before and after fights,  the corpse handlers who dragged the losers off the sands with chains and iron hooks.   Nurse’s face had given Tyrion his first inkling. After their show, he and Penny had returned to  the torchlit vault where the fighters gathered before and after their matches. Some sat sharpening their  weapons; others sacrificed to queer gods, or dulled their nerves with milk of the poppy before going out  to die. Those who’d fought and won were dicing in a corner, laughing as only men who have just faced  death and lived can laugh.  Nurse was paying out some silver to a pit man on a lost wager when he spied Penny leading  Crunch. The confusion in his eyes was gone in half a heartbeat, but not before Tyrion grasped what it  meant. Nurse did not expect us back. He had looked around at other faces. None of them expected us  back. We were meant to die out there. The final piece fell into place when he overheard an animal  trainer complaining loudly to the pitmaster. “The lions are hungry. Two days since they ate. I was told  not to feed them, and I haven’t. The queen should pay for meat.”  “You take that up with her the next time she holds court,” the pitmaster threw back at him.  Even now, Penny did not suspect. When she spoke about the pit, her chief worry was that more  people had not laughed. They would have pissed themselves laughing if the lions had been loosed, Tyrion  almost told her. Instead he’d squeezed her shoulder.  Penny came to a sudden halt. “We’re going the wrong way.”  “We’re not.” Tyrion lowered his pails to the ground. The handles had gouged deep grooves in  his fingers. “Those are the tents we want, there.”  “The Second Sons?” A queer smile split Ser Jorah’s face. “If you think to find help there, you  don’t know Brown Ben Plumm.”  “Oh, I do. Plumm and I have played five games of cyvasse. Brown Ben is shrewd, tenacious, not  unintelligent … but wary. He likes to let his opponent take the risks whilst he sits back and keeps his  options open, reacting to the battle as it takes shape.”  “Battle? What battle?” Penny backed away from him. “We have to get back. The master needs  clean water. If we take too long, we’ll be whipped. And Pretty Pig and Crunch are there.”  “Sweets will see that they are taken care of,” Tyrion lied. More like, Scar and his friends would  soon be feasting on ham and bacon and a savory dog stew, but Penny did not need to hear that. “Nurse  is dead and Yezzan’s dying. It could be dark before anyone thinks to miss us. We will never have a better  chance than now.”  “No. You know what they do when they catch slaves trying to escape. You know. Please. They’ll  never let us leave the camp.”  “We haven’t left the camp.” Tyrion picked up his pails. He set off at a brisk waddle, never  looking back. Mormont fell in beside him. After a moment he heard the sounds of Penny hurrying after  him, down a sandy slope to a circle of ragged tents.   The first guard appeared as they neared the horse lines, a lean spear-man whose maroon beard  marked him as Tyroshi. “What do we have here? And what have you got in those pails?”  “Water,” said Tyrion, “if it please you.”  “Beer would please me better.” A spearpoint pricked him in the back—a second guard, come up  behind them. Tyrion could hear King’s Landing in his voice. Scum from Flea Bottom. “You lost, dwarf?”  the guard demanded.  “We’re here to join your company.”  A pail slipped from Penny’s grasp and overturned. Half the water had spilled before she could  right it once again.  “We got fools enough in this company. Why would we want three more?” The Tyroshi flicked at  Tyrion’s collar with his spearpoint, ringing the little golden bell. “A runaway slave is what I see. Three  runaway slaves. Whose collar?”  “The Yellow Whale’s.” That from a third man, drawn by their voices—a skinny stubble-jawed  piece of work with teeth stained red from sourleaf. A serjeant, Tyrion knew, from the way the other two  deferred to him. He had a hook where his right hand should have been. Bronn’s meaner bastard  shadow, or I’m Baelor the Beloved. “These are the dwarfs Ben tried to buy,” the serjeant told the  spearmen, squinting, “but the big one … best bring him too. All three.”  The Tyroshi gestured with his spear. Tyrion moved along. The other sell sword—a stripling,  hardly more than a boy, with fuzz on his cheeks and hair the color of dirty straw—scooped up Penny  under one arm. “Ooh, mine has teats,” he said, laughing. He slipped a hand under Penny’s tunic, just to  be sure.  “Just bring her,” snapped the serjeant.  The stripling slung Penny over one shoulder. Tyrion went ahead as quick as his stunted legs  would allow. He knew where they were going: the big tent on the far side of the fire pit, its painted  canvas walls cracked and faded by years of sun and rain. A few sellswords turned to watch them pass,  and a camp follower sniggered, but no one moved to interfere.  Within the tent, they found camp stools and a trestle table, a rack of spears and halberds, a  floor covered with threadbare carpets in half a dozen clashing colors, and three officers. One was slim  and elegant, with a pointed beard, a bravo’s blade, and a slashed pink doublet. One was plump and  balding, with ink stains on his fingers and a quill clutched in one hand.  The third was the man he sought. Tyrion bowed. “Captain.”  “We caught them creeping into camp.” The stripling dumped Penny onto the carpet.  “Runaways,” the Tyroshi declared. “With pails.”   “Pails?” said Brown Ben Plumm. When no one ventured to explain, he said, “Back to your posts,  boys. And not a word o’ this, to anyone.” When they were gone, he smiled at Tyrion. “Come for another  game of cyvasse, Yollo?”  “If you wish. I do enjoy defeating you. I hear you’re twice a turncloak, Plumm. A man after mine  own heart.”  Brown Ben’s smile never reached his eyes. He studied Tyrion as a man might study a talking  snake. “Why are you here?”  “To make your dreams come true. You tried to buy us at auction. Then you tried to win us at  cyvasse. Even when I had my nose, I was not so handsome as to provoke such passion … save in one who  happened to know my true worth. Well, here I am, free for the taking. Now be a friend, send for your  smith, and get these collars off us. I’m sick of tinkling when I tinkle.”  “I want no trouble with your noble master.”  “Yezzan has more urgent matters to concern him than three missing slaves. He’s riding the pale  mare. And why should they think to look for us here? You have swords enough to discourage anyone  who comes nosing round. A small risk for a great gain.”  The jackanapes in the slashed pink doublet hissed. “They’ve brought the sickness amongst us.  Into our very tents.” He turned to Ben Plumm. “Shall I cut his head off, Captain? We can toss the rest in  a latrine pit.” He drew a sword, a slender bravo’s blade with a jeweled hilt.  “Do be careful with my head,” said Tyrion. “You don’t want to get any of my blood on you. Blood  carries the disease. And you’ll want to boil our clothes, or burn them.”  “I’ve a mind to burn them with you still in them, Yollo.”  “That is not my name. But you know that. You have known that since you first set eyes on me.”  “Might be.”  “I know you as well, my lord,” said Tyrion. “You’re less purple and more brown than the Plumms  at home, but unless your name’s a lie, you’re a westerman, by blood if not by birth. House Plumm is  sworn to Casterly Rock, and as it happens I know a bit of its history. Your branch sprouted from a stone  spit across the narrow sea, no doubt. A younger son of Viserys Plumm, I’d wager. The queen’s dragons  were fond of you, were they not?”  That seemed to amuse the sellsword. “Who told you that?”  “No one. Most of the stories you hear about dragons are fodder for fools. Talking dragons,  dragons hoarding gold and gems, dragons with four legs and bellies big as elephants, dragons riddling  with sphinxes … nonsense, all of it. But there are truths in the old books as well. Not only do I know that  the queen’s dragons took to you, but I know why.”   “My mother said my father had a drop of dragon blood.”  “Two drops. That, or a cock six feet long. You know that tale? I do. Now, you’re a clever Plumm,  so you know this head of mine is worth a lordship … back in Westeros, half a world away. By the time  you get it there, only bone and maggots will remain. My sweet sister will deny the head is mine and  cheat you of the promised reward. You know how it is with queens. Fickle cunts, the lot of them, and  Cersei is the worst.”  Brown Ben scratched at his beard. “Could deliver you alive and wriggling, then. Or pop your  head into a jar and pickle it.”  “Or throw in with me. That’s the wisest move.” He grinned. “I was born a second son. This  company is my destiny. “  “The Second Sons have no place for mummers,” the bravo in pink said scornfully. “It’s fighters  we need.”  “I’ve brought you one.” Tyrion jerked a thumb at Mormont. “That creature?” The bravo laughed.  “An ugly brute, but scars alone don’t make a Second Son.”  Tyrion rolled his mismatched eyes. “Lord Plumm, who are these two friends of yours? The pink  one is annoying.”  The bravo curled a lip, whilst the fellow with the quill chuckled at his insolence. But it was Jorah  Mormont who supplied their names. “Inkpots is the company paymaster. The peacock calls himself  Kasporio the Cunning, though Kasporio the Cunt would be more apt. A nasty piece of work.”  Mormont’s face might have been unrecognizable in its battered state, but his voice was  unchanged. Kasporio gave him a startled look, whilst the wrinkles around Plumm’s eyes crinkled in  amusement. “Jorah Mormont? Is that you? Less proud than when you scampered off, though. Must we  still call you ser?”  Ser Jorah’s swollen lips twisted into a grotesque grin. “Give me a sword and you can call me  what you like, Ben.”  Kasporio edged backward. “You … she sent you away …”  “I came back. Call me a fool.”  A fool in love. Tyrion cleared his throat. “You can talk of old times later … after I am done  explaining why my head would be of more use to you upon my shoulders. You will find, Lord Plumm,  that I can be very generous to my friends. If you doubt me, ask Bronn. Ask Shagga, son of Dolf. Ask  Timett, son of Timett.”   “And who would they be?” asked the man called Inkpots. “Good men who pledged me their  swords and prospered greatly by that service.” He shrugged. “Oh, very well, I lied about the ‘good’ part.  They’re bloodthirsty bastards, like you lot.”  “Might be,” said Brown Ben. “Or might be you just made up some names. Shagga, did you say?  Is that a woman’s name?”  “His teats are big enough. Next time we meet I’ll peek beneath his breeches to be sure. Is that a  cyvasse set over there? Bring it out and we’ll have that game. But first, I think, a cup of wine. My throat  is dry as an old bone, and I can see that I have a deal of talking to do.”  The pile of parchments was formidably high. Tyrion looked at it and sighed. “I had understood  you were a band of brothers. Is this the love a brother bears a brother? Where is the trust? The  friendship, the fond regard, the deep affection that only men who have fought and bled together can  ever know?”  “All in time,” said Brown Ben Plumm. “After you sign,” said Inkpots, sharpening a quill.  Kasporio the Cunning touched his sword hilt. “If you would like to start the bleeding now, I will  happ’ly oblige you.”  “How kind of you to offer,” said Tyrion. “I think not.”   Inkpots placed the parchments before Tyrion and handed him the quill. “Here is your ink. From  Old Volantis, this. ’Twill last as long as proper maester’s black. All you need do is sign and pass the notes  to me. I’ll do the rest.”  Tyrion gave him a crooked grin. “Might I read them first?”  “If you like. They are all the same, by and large. Except for the ones at the bottom, but we’ll get  to those in due course.”  Oh, I am sure we will. For most men, there was no cost to joining a company, but he was not  most men. He dipped the quill into the inkpot, leaned over the first parchment, paused, looked up.  “Would you prefer me to sign Yollo or Hugor Hill?”  Brown Ben crinkled up his eyes. “Would you prefer to be returned to Yezzan’s heirs or just  beheaded?”  The dwarf laughed and signed the parchment, Tyrion of House Lannister. As he passed it left to  Inkpots, he riffled through the pile underneath. “There are … what, fifty? Sixty? I’d thought there were  five hundred Second Sons.”  “Five hundred thirteen at present,” Inkpots said. “When you sign our book, we will be five  hundred fourteen.”  “So only one in ten receives a note? That hardly seems fair. I thought you were all  share-and-share-alike in the free companies.” He signed another sheet.  Brown Ben chuckled. “Oh, all share. But not alike. The Second Sons are not unlike a family …”  “… and every family has its drooling cousins.” Tyrion signed another note. The parchment  crinkled crisply as he slid it toward the paymaster. “There are cells down in the bowels of Casterly Rock  where my lord father kept the worst of ours.” He dipped his quill in the inkpot. Tyrion of House  Lannister, he scratched out, promising to pay the bearer of the note one hundred golden dragons. Every  stroke of the quill leaves me a little poorer … or would, if I were not a beggar to begin with. One day he  might rue these signatures. But not this day. He blew on the wet ink, slid the parchment to the  paymaster, and signed the one beneath. And again. And again. And again. “This wounds me deeply, I will  have you know,” he told them between signatures. “In Westeros, the word of a Lannister is considered  good as gold.”  Inkpots shrugged. “This is not Westeros. On this side of the narrow sea, we put our promises on  paper.” As each sheet was passed to him, he scattered fine sand across the signature to drink up excess  ink, shook it off, and set the note aside. “Debts written on the wind tend to be … forgotten, shall we  say?”  “Not by us.” Tyrion signed another sheet. And another. He had found a rhythm now. “A  Lannister always pays his debts.”   Plumm chuckled. “Aye, but a sellsword’s word is worthless.”  Well, yours is, thought Tyrion, and thank the gods for that. “True, but I will not be a sellsword  until I’ve signed your book.”  “Soon enough,” said Brown Ben. “After the notes.”  “I am dancing as fast as I can.” He wanted to laugh, but that would have ruined the game.  Plumm was enjoying this, and Tyrion had no intention of spoiling his fun. Let him go on thinking that he’s  bent me over and fucked me up the arse, and I’ll go on buying steel swords with parchment dragons. If  ever he went back to Westeros to claim his birthright, he would have all the gold of Casterly Rock to  make good on his promises. If not, well, he’d be dead, and his new brothers could wipe their arses with  these parchments. Perhaps some might turn up in King’s Landing with their scraps in hand, hoping to  convince his sweet sister to make good on them. And would that I could be a roach in the rushes to  witness that.  The writing on the parchments changed about halfway down the pile. The hundred-dragon  notes were all for serjeants. Below them the amounts suddenly grew larger. Now Tyrion was promising  to pay the bearer one thousand golden dragons. He shook his head, laughed, signed. And again. And  again. “So,” he said as he was scrawling, “what will be my duties with the company?”  “You are too ugly to be Bokkoko’s butt boy,” said Kasporio, “but you might do as arrow fodder.”  “Better than you know,” said Tyrion, refusing to rise to the bait. “A small man with a big shield  will drive the archers mad. A wiser man than you once told me that.”  “You will work with Inkpots,” said Brown Ben Plumm. “You will work for Inkpots,” said Inkpots.  “Keeping books, counting coin, writing contracts and letters.”  “Gladly,” said Tyrion. “I love books.”  “What else would you do?” sneered Kasporio. “Look at you. You are not fit to fight.”  “I once had charge of all the drains in Casterly Rock,” Tyrion said mildly. “Some of them had  been stopped up for years, but I soon had them draining merrily away.” He dipped the quill in the ink  again. Another dozen notes, and he would be done. “Perhaps I could supervise your camp followers. We  can’t have the men stopped up, now can we?”  That jape did not please Brown Ben. “Stay away from the whores,” he warned. “Most o’ them  are poxy, and they talk. You’re not the first escaped slave to join the company, but that don’t mean we  need to shout your presence. I won’t have you parading about where you might be seen. Stay inside as  much as you can, and shit into your bucket. Too many eyes at the latrines. And never go beyond our  camp without my leave. We can dress you up in squire’s steel, pretend you’re Jorah’s butt boy, but  there’s some will see right through that. Once Meereen is taken and we’re away to Westeros, you can  prance about all you like in gold and crimson. Till then, though …”   “… I shall live beneath a rock and never make a sound. You have my word on that.” Tyrion of  House Lannister, he signed once more, with a flourish. That was the last parchment. Three notes  remained, different from the rest. Two were written on fine vellum and made out by name. For Kasporio  the Cunning, ten thousand dragons. The same for Inkpots, whose true name appeared to be Tybero  Istarion. “Tybero?” said Tyrion. “That sounds almost Lannister. Are you some long-lost cousin?”  “Perhaps. I always pay my debts as well. It is expected of a paymaster. Sign.”  He signed.  Brown Ben’s note was the last. That one had been inscribed upon a sheepskin scroll. One  hundred thousand golden dragons, fifty hides of fertile land, a castle, and a lordship. Well and well. This  Plumm does not come cheaply. Tyrion plucked at his scar and wondered if he ought to make a show of  indignation. When you bugger a man you expect a squeal or two. He could curse and swear and rant of  robbery, refuse to sign for a time, then give in reluctantly, protesting all the while. But he was sick of  mummery, so instead he grimaced, signed, and handed the scroll back to Brown Ben. “Your cock is as  big as in the stories,” he said. “Consider me well and truly fucked, Lord Plumm.”  Brown Ben blew on his signature. “My pleasure, Imp. And now, we make you one o’ us. Inkpots,  fetch the book.”  The book was leather-bound with iron hinges, and large enough to eat your supper off. Inside its  heavy wooden boards were names and dates going back more than a century. “The Second Sons are  amongst the oldest of the free companies,” Inkpots said as he was turning pages. “This is the fourth  book. The names of every man to serve with us are written here. When they joined, where they fought,  how long they served, the manner of their deaths—all in the book. You will find famous names in here,  some from your Seven Kingdoms. Aegor Rivers served a year with us, before he left to found the Golden  Company. Bittersteel, you call him. The Bright Prince, Aerion Targaryen, he was a Second Son. And  Rodrik Stark, the Wandering Wolf, him as well. No, not that ink. Here, use this.” He unstoppered a new  pot and set it down.  Tyrion cocked his head. “Red ink?”  “A tradition of the company,” Inkpots explained. “There was a time when each new man wrote  his name in his own blood, but as it happens, blood makes piss-poor ink.”  “Lannisters love tradition. Lend me your knife.”  Inkpots raised an eyebrow, shrugged, slipped his dagger from its sheath, and handed it across  hiltfirst. It still hurts, Halfmaester, thank you very much, thought Tyrion, as he pricked the ball of his  thumb. He squeezed a fat drop of blood into the inkpot, traded the dagger for a fresh quill, and  scrawled, Tyrion of House Lannister, Lord of Casterly  Rock, in a big bold hand, just below Jorah Mormont’s far more modest signature.   And it’s done. The dwarf rocked back on the camp stool. “Is that all that you require of me?  Don’t I need to swear an oath? Kill a baby? Suck the captain’s cock?”  “Suck whatever you like.” Inkpots turned the book around and dusted the page with a bit of fine  sand. “For most of us, the signature suffices, but I would hate to disappoint a new brother-in-arms.  Welcome to the Second Sons, Lord Tyrion.”  Lord Tyrion. The dwarf liked the sound of that. The Second Sons might not enjoy the shining  reputation of the Golden Company, but they had won some famous victories over the centuries. “Have  other lords served with the company?”  “Landless lords,” said Brown Ben. “Like you, Imp.”  Tyrion hopped down from the stool. “My previous brother was entirely unsatisfactory. I hope  for more from my new ones. Now how do I go about securing arms and armor?”  “Will you want a pig to ride as well?” asked Kasporio. “Why, I did not know your wife was in the  company,” said Tyrion. “That’s kind of you to offer her, but I would prefer a horse.”  The bravo reddened, but Inkpots laughed aloud and Brown Ben went so far as to chuckle.  “Inkpots, show him to the wagons. He can have his pick from the company steel. The girl too. Put a helm  on her, a bit o’ mail, might be some will take her for a boy.”  “Lord Tyrion, with me.” Inkpots held the tent flap to let him waddle through. “I will have Snatch  take you to the wagons. Get your woman and meet him by the cook tent.”  “She is not my woman. Perhaps you should get her. All she does of late is sleep and glare at  me.”  “You need to beat her harder and fuck her more often,” the paymaster offered helpfully. “Bring  her, leave her, do what you will. Snatch will not care. Come find me when you have your armor, and I  will start you on the ledgers.”  “As you wish.”  Tyrion found Penny asleep in a corner of their tent, curled up on a thin straw pallet beneath a  heap of soiled bedclothes. When he touched her with the toe of his boot, she rolled over, blinked at  him, and yawned. “Hugor? What is it?”  “Talking again, are we?” It was better than her usual sullen silence. All over an abandoned dog  and pig. I saved the two of us from slavery, you would think some gratitude might be in order. “If you  sleep any longer, you’re like to miss the war.”  “I’m sad.” She yawned again. “And tired. So tired.”  Tired or sick? Tyrion knelt beside her pallet. “You look pale.” He felt her brow. Is it hot in here, or  does she have a touch of fever? He dared not ask that question aloud. Even hard men like the Second   Sons were terrified of mounting the pale mare. If they thought Penny was sick, they would drive her off  without a moment’s hesitation. They might even return us to Yezzan’s heirs, notes or no notes. “I have  signed their book. The old way, in blood. I am now a Second Son.”  Penny sat up, rubbing the sleep from her eyes. “What about me? Can I sign too?”  “I think not. Some free companies have been known to take women, but … well, they are not  Second Daughters, after all.”  “We,” she said. “If you’re one of them, you should say we, not they. Has anyone seen Pretty Pig?  Inkpots said he’d ask after her. Or Crunch, has there been word of Crunch?”  Only if you trust Kasporio. Plumm’s not-so-cunning second-in-command claimed that three  Yunkish slave-catchers were prowling through the camps, asking after a pair of escaped dwarfs. One of  them was carrying a tall spear with a dog’s head impaled upon its point, the way that Kaspo told it. Such  tidings were not like to get Penny out of bed, however. “No word as yet,” he lied. “Come. We need to  find some armor for you.”  She gave him a wary look. “Armor? Why?”  “Something my old master-at-arms told me. ‘Never go to battle naked, lad,’ he said. I take him  at his word. Besides, now that I’m a sellsword, I really ought to have a sword to sell.” She still showed no  signs of moving. Tyrion seized her by the wrist, pulled her to her feet, and threw a fistful of clothing into  her face. “Dress. Wear the cloak with the hood and keep your head down. We’re supposed to be a pair  of likely lads, just in case the slave-catchers are watching.”  Snatch was waiting by the cook tent chewing sourleaf when the two dwarfs turned up, cloaked  and hooded. “I hear the two o’ you are going to fight for us,” the serjeant said. “That should have them  pissing in Meereen. Either o’ you ever killed a man?”  “I have,” said Tyrion. “I swat them down like flies.”  “What with?”  “An axe, a dagger, a choice remark. Though I’m deadliest with my crossbow.”  Snatch scratched at his stubble with the point of his hook. “Nasty thing, a crossbow. How many  men you kill with that?”  “Nine.” His father counted for at least that many, surely. Lord of Casterly Rock, Warden of the  West, Shield of Lannisport, Hand of the King, husband, brother, father, father, father.  “Nine.” Snatch snorted and spat out a mouthful of red slime. Aiming for Tyrion’s feet, perhaps,  but it landed on his knee. Plainly that was what he thought of “nine.” The serjeant’s fingers were stained  a mottled red from the juice of the sourleaf he chewed. He put two of them into his mouth and   whistled. “Kem! Get over here, you fucking pisspot.” Kem came running. “Take Lord and Lady Imp to the  wagons, have Hammer fix them up with some company steel.”  “Hammer might be passed-out drunk,” Kem cautioned. “Piss in his face. That’ll wake him up.”  Snatch turned back to Tyrion and Penny. “We never had no bloody dwarfs before, but boys we never  lacked for. Sons o’ this whore or that one, little fools run off from home to have adventures, butt boys,  squires, and the like. Some o’ their shit might be small enough to fit imps. It’s the shit they were wear ing  when they died, like as not, but I know that won’t bother fuckers fierce as you two. Nine, was it?” He  shook his head and walked away.  The Second Sons kept their company armor in six big wayns drawn up near the center of their  camp. Kem led the way, swinging his spear as if it were a staff. “How does a King’s Landing lad end up  with a free company?” Tyrion asked him.  The lad gave him a wary squint. “Who told you I was from King’s Landing?”  “No one.” Every word out of your mouth reeks of Flea Bottom. “Your wits gave you away.  There’s no one clever as a Kingslander, they say.”  That seemed to startle him. “Who says that?”  “Everyone.” Me. “Since when?”  Since I just made it up. “For ages,” he lied. “My father was wont to say it. Did you know Lord  Tywin, Kem?”  “The Hand. Once I saw him riding up the hill. His men had red cloaks and little lions on their  helms. I liked those helms.” His mouth tightened. “I never liked the Hand, though. He sacked the city.  And then he smashed us on the Blackwater.”  “You were there?”  “With Stannis. Lord Tywin come up with Renly’s ghost and took us in the flank. I dropped my  spear and ran, but at the ships this bloody knight said, ‘Where’s your spear, boy? We got no room for  cravens,’ and they buggered off and left me, and thousands more besides. Later I heard how your father  was sending them as fought with Stannis to the Wall, so I made my way across the narrow sea and  joined up with the Second Sons.”  “Do you miss King’s Landing?”  “Some. I miss this boy, he … he was a friend of mine. And my brother, Kennet, but he died on  the bridge of ships.”  “Too many good men died that day.” Tyrion’s scar was itching fiercely. He picked at it with a  fingernail.  “I miss the food too,” Kem said wistfully. “Your mother’s cooking?”   “Rats wouldn’t eat my mother’s cooking. There was this pot shop, though. No one ever made a  bowl o’ brown like them. So thick you could stand your spoon up in the bowl, with chunks of this and  that. You ever have yourself a bowl o’ brown, Halfman?”  “A time or two. Singer’s stew, I call it.”  “Why’s that?”  “It tastes so good it makes me want to sing.”  Kem liked that. “Singer’s stew. I’ll ask for that next time I get back to Flea Bottom. What do you  miss, Halfman?”  Jaime, thought Tyrion. Shae. Tysha. My wife, I miss my wife, the wife I hardly knew. “Wine,  whores, and wealth,” he answered. “Especially the wealth. Wealth will buy you wine and whores.” It will  also buy you swords, and the Kems to wield them.  “Is it true the chamber pots in Casterly Rock are made of solid gold?” Kem asked him.  “You should not believe everything you hear. Especially where House Lannister is concerned.”  “They say all Lannisters are twisty snakes.”  “Snakes?” Tyrion laughed. “That sound you hear is my lord father, slithering in his grave. We are  lions, or so we like to say. But it makes no matter, Kem. Step on a snake or a lion’s tail, you’ll end up just  as dead.”  By then they had reached the armory, such as it was. The smith, this fabled Hammer, proved to  be a freakish-looking hulk with a left arm that appeared twice as thick as his right. “He’s drunk more  than not,” Kem said. “Brown Ben lets it go, but one day we’ll get us a real armorer.” Hammer’s  apprentice was a wiry red-haired youth called Nail. Of course. What else? mused Tyrion. Hammer was  sleeping off a drunk when they reached the forge, just as Kem had prophesied, but Nail had no objection  to the two dwarfs clambering through the wagons. “Crap iron, most of it,” he warned them, “but you’re  welcome to anything you can use.”  Under roofs of bent wood and stiffened leather, the wagon beds were heaped high with old  weaponry and armor. Tyrion took one look and sighed, remembering the gleaming racks of swords and  spears and halberds in the armory of the Lannisters below Casterly Rock. “This may take a while,” he  declared.  “There’s sound steel here if you can find it,” a deep voice growled. “None of it is pretty, but it  will stop a sword.”  A big knight stepped down from the back of a wagon, clad head to heel in company steel. His  left greave did not match his right, his gorget was spotted with rust, his vambraces rich and ornate,  inlaid with niello flowers. On his right hand was a gauntlet of lobstered steel, on his left a fingerless mitt   of rusted mail. The nipples on his muscled breastplate had a pair of iron rings through them. His  greathelm sported a ram’s horns, one of which was broken.  When he took it off, he revealed the battered face of Jorah Mormont. He looks every inch a  sellsword and not at all like the half-broken thing we took from Yezzan’s cage, Tyrion reflected. His  bruises had mostly faded by now, and the swelling in his face had largely subsided, so Mormont looked  almost human once again … though only vaguely like himself. The demon’s mask the slavers had burned  into his right cheek to mark him for a dangerous and disobedient slave would never leave him. Ser Jorah  had never been what one might call a comely man. The brand had transformed his face into something  frightening.  Tyrion grinned. “As long as I look prettier than you, I will be happy.” He turned to Penny. “You  take that wagon. I’ll start with this one.”  “It will go faster if we look together.” She plucked up a rusted iron half-helm, giggled, and stuck  it on her head. “Do I look fearsome?”  You look like a mummer girl with a pot on her head. “That’s a halfhelm. You want a greathelm.”  He found one, and swapped it for the halfhelm.  “It’s too big.” Penny’s voice echoed hollowly inside the steel. “I can’t see out.” She took the  helm off and flung it aside. “What’s wrong with the halfhelm?”  “It’s open-faced.” Tyrion pinched her nose. “I am fond of looking at your nose. I would rather  that you kept it.”  Her eyes got big. “You like my nose?”  Oh, Seven save me. Tyrion turned away and began rooting amongst some piles of old armor  toward the back of the wagon.  “Are there any other parts of me you like?” Penny asked.  Perhaps she meant that to sound playful. It sounded sad instead. “I am fond of all of your parts,”  Tyrion said, in hopes of ending any further discussion of the subject, “and even fonder of mine own.”  “Why should we need armor? We’re only mummers. We just pretend to fight.”  “You pretend very well,” said Tyrion, examining a shirt of heavy iron mail so full of holes that it  almost looked moth-eaten. What sort of moths eat chainmail? “Pretending to be dead is one way to  survive a battle. Good armor is another.” Though there is precious little of that here, I fear. At the Green  Fork, he had fought in mismatched scraps of plate from Lord Lefford’s wagons, with a spiked bucket  helm that made it look as if someone had upended a slops pail over his head. This company steel was  worse. Not just old and ill fitting, but dinted, cracked, and brittle. Is that dried blood, or only rust? He  sniffed at it but still could not be sure.   “Here’s a crossbow.” Penny showed it to him.  Tyrion glanced at it. “I cannot use a stirrup winch. My legs are not long enough. A crank would  serve me better.” Though, if truth be told, he did not want a crossbow. They took too long to reload.  Even if he lurked by the latrine ditch waiting for some enemy to take a squat, the chances of his losing  more than one quarrel would not be good.  Instead he picked up a morningstar, gave it a swing, put it down again. Too heavy. He passed  over a warhammer (too long), a studded mace (also too heavy), and half a dozen longswords before he  found a dirk he liked, a nasty piece of steel with a triangular blade. “This might serve,” he said. The blade  had a bit of rust on it, but that would only make it nastier. He found a wood-and-leather sheath that fit  and slipped the dirk inside.  “A little sword for a little man?” joked Penny. “It’s a dirk and made for a big man.” Tyrion  showed her an old long-sword. “This is a sword. Try it.”  Penny took it, swung it, frowned. “Too heavy.”  “Steel weighs more than wood. Chop through a man’s neck with that thing, though, and his  head is not like to turn into a melon.” He took the sword back from her and inspected it more closely.  “Cheap steel. And notched. Here, see? I take back what I said. You need a better blade to hack off  heads.”  “I don’t want to hack off heads.”  “Nor should you. Keep your cuts below the knee. Calf, hamstring, ankle … even giants fall if you  slice their feet off. Once they’re down, they’re no bigger than you.”  Penny looked as though she was about to cry. “Last night I dreamed my brother was alive again.  We were jousting before some great lord, riding Crunch and Pretty Pig, and men were throwing roses at  us. We were so happy …”  Tyrion slapped her.  It was a soft blow, all in all, a little flick of the wrist, with hardly any force behind it. It did not  even leave a mark upon her cheek. But her eyes filled with tears all the same.  “If you want to dream, go back to sleep,” he told her. “When you wake up, we’ll still be escaped  slaves in the middle of a siege. Crunch is dead. The pig as well, most like. Now find some armor and put  it on, and never mind where it pinches. The mummer show is over. Fight or hide or shit yourself, as you  like, but whatever you decide to do, you’ll do it clad in steel.”  Penny touched the cheek he’d slapped. “We should never have run. We’re not sellswords.  We’re not any kind of swords. It wasn’t so bad with Yezzan. It wasn’t. Nurse was cruel sometimes but  Yezzan never was. We were his favorites, his … his …”   “Slaves. The word you want is slaves.”  “Slaves,” she said, flushing. “We were his special slaves, though. Just like Sweets. His treasures.”  His pets, thought Tyrion. And he loved us so much that he sent us to the pit, to be devoured by  lions.  She was not all wrong. Yezzan’s slaves ate better than many peasants back in the Seven  Kingdoms and were less like to starve to death come winter. Slaves were chattels, aye. They could be  bought and sold, whipped and branded, used for the carnal pleasure of their owners, bred to make  more slaves. In that sense they were no more than dogs or horses. But most lords treated their dogs and  horses well enough. Proud men might shout that they would sooner die free than live as slaves, but  pride was cheap. When the steel struck the flint, such men were rare as dragon’s teeth; elsewise the  world would not have been so full of slaves. There has never been a slave who did not choose to be a  slave, the dwarf reflected. Their choice may be between bondage and death, but the choice is always  there.  Tyrion Lannister did not except himself. His tongue had earned him some stripes on the back in  the beginning, but soon enough he had learned the tricks of pleasing Nurse and the noble Yezzan. Jorah  Mormont had fought longer and harder, but he would have come to the same place in the end.  And Penny, well …  Penny had been searching for a new master since the day her brother Groat had lost his head.  She wants someone to take care of her, someone to tell her what to do.  It would have been too cruel to say so, however. Instead Tyrion said, “Yezzan’s special slaves did  not escape the pale mare. They’re dead, the lot of them. Sweets was the first to go.” Their mammoth  master had died on the day of their escape, Brown Ben Plumm had told him. Neither he nor Kasporio  nor any of the other sellswords knew the fate of the denizens of Yezzan’s grotesquerie … but if Pretty  Penny needed lies to stop her mooning, lie to her he would. “If you want to be a slave again, I will find  you a kind master when this war is done, and sell you for enough gold to get me home,” Tyrion  promised her. “I’ll find you some nice Yunkishman to give you another pretty golden collar, with little  bells on it that will tinkle everywhere you go. First, though, you will need to survive what’s coming. No  one buys dead mummers.”  “Or dead dwarfs,” said Jorah Mormont. “We are all like to be feeding worms by the time this  battle is done. The Yunkai’i have lost this war, though it may take them some time to know it. Meereen  has an army of Unsullied infantry, the finest in the world. And Meereen has dragons. Three of them,  once the queen returns. She will. She must. Our side consists of two score Yunkish lordlings, each with  his own half-trained monkey men. Slaves on stilts, slaves in chains … they may have troops of blind men  and palsied children too, I would not put it past them.”  “Oh, I know,” said Tyrion. “The Second Sons are on the losing side. They need to turn their  cloaks again and do it now.” He grinned. “Leave that to me.”  